rsE ae ass 20200312 Deae The galaxy has been a peaceful place for many years. After the ruthless Terran—Hegemony War (30.027—33.364), much effort has been employed by all major spacefaring species to prevent the terrifying events from repeating themselves. The Galactic Council was formed to enforce precious peace, and it has taken many courageous efforts to preventthe escalation of malicious acts. Nevertheless, tension and discord are grow.ing among the seven major species and in the Council itself. Old alliances are shattering, and hasty diplomatic treaties are made in secrecy. A confrontation of the superpowers seems inevi.table—only the outcome ofthe galactic conflict remains to be seen. Which faction will emerge victorious and lead the galaxy under its rule? The shadows ofthe great civilizations are about to eclipse the galaxy. Lead your people to victory! aE) Game design Touko Tahkokallio Development, graphic design Jere Kasanen >>> lautapelit.fi Sampo Sikié >>> samposdesign.com Rule book Jere Kasanen >>> lautapelit.fi Sampo Sikié >>> samposdesign.com Van Willis Proofreading Van Willis WU Rel co)cTa Pele releiced Gi) Game boxcover and Alien Species illustrations Jukka Rajaniemi Rulebook cover and Terran Species illustrations Kory Lynn Hubbel GCDS, Ancient, Orbital, Monolith, and Terran miniatures Chad Hoverter >>> DMG Miniature Factory BIA) = Nee(ole CCURCN es ice © Lautapelit.fi 2019 >>> lautapelit-fi Game rules and hexes use elementsof images created by ESA/Hubble and released with their kind permission. ECLIPSE typefaceis based on Franchise by Derek Weathersbee. Thank You for playtests and advice Aapolho, Aarne Ekstrém, Aila Harmaajarvi, Albert Kaikkonen, Aleksi Ahtiainen, Aleksi Siirtola, Alex Powers, Alexis Desplats, Andy Anderson, Anselmi Helminen, Antero Kuusi, Antti Autio, Antti Koskinen, Antti Mentula, Antti Muhonen, Antti Tahvanainen, Antti Tamminen, Antti Uusitupa, Anttoni Huhtala, Arto Klami, Aser Mousli, Asmo Voutilainen, Atro Kajaste, Atte Moilanen, Atte Tamminen, Axel Stoesser, Becky Slawson, Benjamin Holt, Bjarne Bostr6m, Bogustaw Kubacki, Brandon Streiff, Brent Lloyd, Brian Busha, Chisse Berg,Chris Litvin, Chris Rudram, Christoph Kiebeler, Christopher Gilley, Claudio Tamburini, Dana Giles, Daniel Hammond, Darren Ede, Dave Chandler, Dave Hayes, David Elliot, David Williams, Deryk Sinotte, Dustin Boggs, Eero Puurunen, Emily Rahn, Erno Nolvi, Everett Grimley, Filip Murmak, Freddy Reays, Gerrit Geens, Greg Hwang, Gregor MacDougall, Gursal Sinik, Hannele Kirjavainen, Hannu Sinisalo, Harald Arlander, Heikki Hyhk6, Heikki Laakkonen, Henrik Meurman, lina Valkeisenmaki, Ilari Tahkokallio, CMANOl IMM CCRT ini alcle Pm Lac isi (e) acm AULT asi 0e14 Eel] C<) Uusitupa, Jack Barnard, Jani Koistiola, Janne Koskinen, Jason LaRoche, Jason Robinson, Jenny Nguyen, Jim Chao, Joe Chung, Johanna Louhesto, Johannes Hakala, Jonathan Cox, Jonathan Madison, Joni Kajander, Josh Aitken, Jouni Heinanen, Juha Julkunen, Juha Linnanen, Juha Luostarinen, Juhana Keskinen, Jussi Kurki, Juuso Mattila, Juuso Takalainen, Jyrki Salminen, Kalle Malmioja, Karthik Tiruthani, Katja Rauhala, Kim Alberto, Kimmo Leivo, Krzysztof Sikora, Larry Zafran, Lassi Remes, Lee Riekman, Lewis Wagner, Lloyd Young, Lonnie Heinke, Loren Cadelinia, tukasz tazarecki, tukasz Ortowski, Maria Kivilaakso, Mark Creaghe, Mark Wignall, Markus Christopher, Markus Meurman, Martin Mayer, Mathue Faulkner, Matias Viitasalo, Matleena Muhonen, Matt and Mystie Winckler, Matti Leinonen, Michael Evans, Michael Thai, Michael Xuereb, Miika Kirjavainen, Mika Lemstrém, Mikaela Kumlander, Mike DeMers, Mike Erakat, Mikko Karvonen, Mikko Saari, Miro Kirjavainen, Nick Christie, Nicole Meyer, Olli Sandberg, Olli-Pekka Vaija, Oskari Tahkokallio, Oskari Westerholm, Ossi Lehtinen, Otso Tahkokallio, Otto Kataja, Otto Pyykk6nen, Paul Grogan, Paul Laane, Paul Slawson, Peter Bierfeldt, Peter Olandt, Petri Kangassalo, Petri Savola, R. Ryan Driskel, Reko Nokkanen, Ricko Kong, Riku Malminiemi, Riku Riekkinen, Risto Ruupunen, Roger Cliff, Ronny Vorbrodt, Ryan Donnelly, Saku Sairanen, Sally Londesborough, Sami Harju, Sami Lyden, Sarah Herman, Scott DeMers, Scott Sims, Shannon Krumick, Shawn Macleod, Sonja Tolvanen, Séren Paukstadt, Stefan Engblom, Stefan Lindenberg, Stefan Wahoff, Steve Barrera, Susanna Louhesto, Tapani Honkanen, Tatu Pyykkénen, Teemu Salohalme, Tero Sarkijarvi, Thuy Pham-Linko,Tiina Merikoski, Tiina Meurman, Tim Hueskin, Timo Aho, Timo Ollikainen, Toni Malinen, Toni Miinalainen, Toni Saastamoinen, Tony Vickery, Tuomas Hanhivaara, Tuomas Ikonen, Tuomas Lehto, Tuomas Toimela, Tuukka Kallas, Uri Cadelinia, Valtteri Arvaja, Veli-Matti Jaakkola, Viljami Halla, Ville Saari. Also a big Thank You to everyone on the BoardGameGeek and Afol cecavlan co) mVeLUl mn iecle-rime-l ale Re] ) ole) aa] NOTE The following formatting has been used to help identify important game terms and Eclipse places you in control of a vastconceptsas you read the rules: interstellar civilization, competing for* Game/componenttermsare Capitalized. domination with its rivals.¢ Key rules are emphasizedin bold. * Notes/exceptions are presentedin italics. Each Round expand your civilization by Exploring and colonizing new Sector hexes (Sectors), Researching Technologies (Techs), and Building Spaceships (Ships) to wage war. After eight Rounds the game ends,and victory is awardedto the player with the most Victory Points (VP). VP are gained from fighting battles,Ay, Be@ S.@ forming Diplomatic Relations, ControllingANCIENTS: GUARDIANS Gods MONOLITH ORBITAL Sectors, Controlling Monoliths, making Discoveries, and Researching Techs. There are manypotential pathsto victory, so plan your strategy according to your civilization's strengths and weaknesses while paying attention to other civilizations' endeavors! SPECIES TRAY + LID SU Enaty tyLAf INTERCEPTOR CRUISER DRENDNOUGHT STARSASE ee aub a CIVILIZATION COMPONENTS Each civilization (blue, red, green, yellow, white, black) has: 18 Ships (8 Interceptors, 4 Cruisers, 2 Dreadnoughts,4 Starbases), 33 Population Cubes, 16 Influence Discs, 3 Ambassador Tiles. SECTOR HEXES 43 Sectors: 10 Inner SectorsSECTOR HEX GALACTIC STARTING SECTOR HEX GUARDIAN SECTOR HEX CENTER SECTOR HEX (101-110), 13 Middle Sectors (201-211, 214, 281), 20 Outer Sectors (301-318, 381-382); 1 Galactic Center Sector (001), 6 Starting Sectors (221-232), 4 Guardian Sectors (271-274). BOARDS & TRAYS 6 Species Boards (two-sided), 6 Species Trays (Tray + Lid), 6 Control Board TECH TRAY tops, 6 Control Board bottoms, 1 Tech Tray, 1 Upgrade Tray, 2 Table Trays, 1 Base Tray. TILES 114 Tech Tiles (39 different), 282 Ship PartTiles (24 different), 36 DiscoveryTiles (24 different), 19 Colony Ship Tiles, 6 Blueprint Tiles (2 Ancient, 2 Galactic Center Defense“ -‘aN System, 2 Guardian), 33 Reputation Tiles, 10UPGRNIE TRAY TABLE TRAY extra Orbital/Monolith Tiles, 5 extra Colony Ship Tiles, 1 Start Player Tile, 6 SummaryTiles, 1 Traitor Tile, 4 Info Tiles. aa9 Ein GUARDIAN TECHTILE SHIP PART DISCOVERY TILE COLONY SHIP TILE BLUEPRINT TILE MINIATURES 1 Galactic Center Defense TILE System, 14 Ancients, 4 Guardians, 12 Orbitals, 10 Monoliths. MISCELLANEDUS 24 custom 6-sided dice (8 yellow, 6 orange,6 blue, 4 red), 18 tee REPUTATION SE TILE TL Storage Markers (6 each in orange,pink, andSTART PLAYER TILE SUMMARY TILE TRAITOR TILE brown), 12 purple Damage Cubes, 1 Round Marker, 1 black Reputation Tile Bag, 1 white Tech Tile Bag. a, cal MARKER DAMAGE ROUND CUSE MARKER DICE Ww caDs = 6 es* wo.® 2 Ww fe 2 PLAYERS oa= ®wo” & G PLAYERS ® STARTING SECTOR | Oe GUARDIAN SECTOR © GaacticCENTER SECTORcael Upgrade Tray JJ Round Marker KJ Tech Tray Eq Research Track [J Damage Cubes i GCDs,Ancient, and Guardian BlueprintTiles Ancients miniatures B Orbital miniatures J Monolith miniatures [JJ Traitor Tile [JJ Discovery Tiles Dice Guardian miniatures Sector stacks—Inner (I), Middle (Il), and Outer (III) Guardian Sector [J Starting Sector Galactic Center Defense System miniature Galactic Center Sector PLAYER AREA SPECIES 30NRD  By interceptor Blueprint FJ Cruiser Blueprint  DreadnoughtBlueprint  Dstarbase Blueprint J Species symbol fj  Species name [f] Trade Value  LSpecies abilities (see pages 26-28 for details) [] Starting Sector  Tech Track  SPECIES TRAY  Starting Tech  Action Track [J Influence Track [J] Reputation Track  DH storage Markers[J Storage Track [J Graveyards  BJ Population Cubes f§  Cruiser miniatures  Ambassador Tiles [J SummaryTile  Dreadnought miniatures  Starbase miniatures  Interceptor miniatures  Colony Ships  S TECH TILES 2 players: 12 Put the Tech Tiles in the white Tech Tile Bag and shuffle them. Draw Tech Tiles 3-PLAYER 3 players: 14 randomly from the Tech Tile Bag until the indicated number of regular Tech SETUP EXAMPLE Apla ans 16 Tiles (Military 2 Grid 4, and Nano G3) for your player count has been 5 rece. 18 drawn. Set drawn Tech Tiles in the slots of the Tech Tray with the matching payer: Pech andcosticons.Tech Tile cost is indicated by the valuein the large pink6 players: 20 circle on each Tech Tile. Stack duplicate Tech Tiles in the same slot. Place any Rare TechTiles O drawnin anyof the seven slots on the bottom row of the Tech Tray, but do not count them against the number of regular Tech Tiles drawn for Game Setup. Put the Reputation Tiles in the black Reputation Tile Bag and shuffle them. Shuffle the Discovery Tiles and set them facedown near the Tech Tray and UpgradeTray ff]. Choose one BlueprintTile of each type (Ancient &, Guardian pe GCDS ®) to use for this game (Blueprint Tiles with twonotchesontheir border are advancedandshouldonly be used with experienced players). Set the chosenBlueprint Tiles[§J, Damage Cubesfi, and NOVANGCED the Traitor Tile D beside the Tech and Upgrade Trays i Arrange the Ship BLUEPRINT Part Tiles by type in the Upgrade Tray [I : Set the Galactic Center Sector[J in the middleofthe table. Place a facedown Discovery Tile on the Galactic Center Sector's Discovery TileOUTER SECTORS " : Sstsymbol, then the Galactic Center Defense System (GCDS) miniature J on 2 players: 5 top. Shuffle each of the Sector hexes by Ring: Inner (1), Middle (Il), and REa 3 players: 8 Outer (III). Note: if you do not want to play with the optional Warp Portals 4 players: 14 module described on page7, remove Sectors 281, 381-382 from the game 5 players: 16 before shuffling the Sector stacks. Place the shuffled Sectors into facedown 6 players: stacks[J with the Outer Sector stack containing the number of Outer (II!) wa Sectors indicated for your player count. Give the Start Player Tile to the GUARDIAN player who has spenttheleast time on planetTerra,in the Sol system. SYMBaL Beginning with the player to the right of the Start Player and moving in counterclockwise order, choosea Species Board and take the Species Tray with a lid of the matching color (these trays contain all individual civilization components—see page4). Note that since Species Boards are double-sided, eachplayerselecting to play Terransis effectively EeEee removing oneAlien Speciesfrom play in that game.Place your Starting EXTRA DISCS? C ) Sector fff] in the Starting Zone closest to you as shownin the Starting Layouts : illustration (oriented so that the arrow faces the GCDS). Next,fill all empty Note that you have three extra Starting Zones with random Guardian Sectors oriented so that the arrow Influence discs that are only faces the GCDS (Guardian Sectors are not usedin 6-player games). Place usedif you Research the ADVANCED a facedownDiscovery TileJ on the Guardian Symbolof each Guardian ROBOTICS or QUANTUM GRID Tech. | Sector ff, then a Guardian miniature[J on top. Put the remaining Starting S—— Sectors ff, Guardian Sectors [i and Species Boards back in the box—theywill not be usedthis game. Take the following components from your Species Tray and set them next to your Species Board: * The numberof Colony Ships shownon your Species Board. |EedI © The Summary Tile, with the Action Phase Overview faceup UR Take the Influence Discs from your Species Tray and place them on the Influence Track] of your Species Board (leave the three Influence Discs that don't fit on your Influence Track in your Species Tray). Place the following on your Control Board: * One Population Cube on each square valued 3-28 ofthe three ry 5 Population Tracks (Materials, Science, and Money) i ft) * One Storage Markerof each colori] on your Storage Track fj, 28 with the single-pointed end of the Storage Marker facing the center of the Control Board, at the Starting Storage Resource values indicated on your Species Board. For vertical assembly, place the Control Board bottom (card stock without Population Cube Leave in your SpeciesTray for easy acces: holes) on the SpeciesTraylid with the[A] faceup * Ships and AmbassadorTiles. in the bottomleft corner. Next place the Control Then moveontoyour Starting Sector: Board top (punchboardwith Population Cube © One Interceptor Ship miniatureff. holes) on the Control Board bottom with the [A] © One Population Cube in each Population Square withouta star, taken from in the bottom left corner. the 3 space of your corresponding Population Track. * OneInfluenceDisc, placed on the Influence Space,taken from theleftmostFor horizontal assembly, place the Control Board space ofyour Influence Track.bottom and top with the [3] in the upper left corner. GAME CONCEPTS ACTIONS AND ACTIVATIONS During each game Round, players take turns selecting and resolving individual Actions until all players Pass. Actions are comprised of a numberof Activations that correspond to your Species and the Techs that you have Researched. Each Activation allows you to perform an activity associated with the chosen Action. This means that each player may have a variable number of activities they can perform each time they select an Action. RESOURCES Sectors Produce up to three kinds of Resources: Materials, Science, and Money. Materials are needed for Building new Ships and Structures.  Science is needed for Researching new Techs.  o Moneyis needed for Controlling Sectors and taking Actions.  The amountof each Resource you have is marked with a Storage Marker on your Storage Track. When you Produce or gain Resources, move the appropriate Storage Marker(s) one space forward on the Storage Track per Resource gained. When  @ oO GAIN.  8 oO PAY  you Pay Resources, move the appropriate Storage Marker backward one space onthe Storage Track per Resource Paid. The amountof Resources you can haveis notlimited by the values on the Storage Track. If you ever have more than 40 of one kind of Resource, turn the Storage: Markerso that the four-pointed end faces the center of the Control Board, indicating you have 40 plus the Storage Track value of that kind of Resource (see page 24 for details on Producing Resources). TRADE At any time, as many times as you chooseandareable, you may Pay the numberof one Resourceindicated by the Trade Value on your Species Board, to gain one Resource (Materials ©. Science , Money ©) of any other kind. POPULATION CUBES Your civilization's population is represented by the Population Cubesin your player color. Population Cubes placed on Sectors Produce Resources (Materials 8 Science , Money ©): The highest value empty square on each Population Track shows how many Resources of each kind you will Produce during the Upkeep Phase (in the picture on right, 15 Materials &. 21Science ,12 Money ©). COLONY SHIPS Colony Ships are used to place Population Cubes on Population Squares in Sectors you Control. Colony Ships are the only way to movePopulation Cubesto Sectors (see page8 for details on Colony Ships). INFLUENCE DISCS Your civilization's influence is represented by the Influence Discs in your player color. Influence Discs are used to mark the Sectors your civilization Controls. Also, each Action you take requires you to move an Influence Disc from your Influence Track to the corresponding Action Space. The leftmost Influence Disc is always used when Influence Discs are moved from your Influence Track. When Influence Discs are movedto your Influence Track, they are always placed on the rightmost available space. The rightmost empty space on the Influence Track shows how much Money you haveto Pay at the end of the Round to keep your civilization functioning (in the picture above, 2 Money ©). Thus, the more Sectors you Control and Actions you take, the more Money you need to maintain your civilization. CONTROL The player with an Influence Disc in a Sector Controls it. Controlling Sectors allows you to expand your empire by colonizing planets, Producing Resources, Building Ships and Structures, and Exploring, Moving or Influencing from a Sector. The player that Controls a Sector Controls its Structures and is always considered the Defender in battles there.  TECH Researching Techs gives your civilization  COLOLPL  advantages. Some Techs are prerequisites for Upgrading your Ships with new Ship Part Tiles or  ic)  Building Starbases and Structures, while others make  :  your civilization moreefficient (e.g. increasing your Production or giving you moreInfluence Discs). Techs are divided into three basic categories (Military Ly? , Grid EY,or Nano ©) plus Rare Techs O.-Each Tech you Research gives you a discount on further Techs Researched in the same category. Researched Tech Tiles are placed on the Tech Track of your Species Board (see pages 10, 11, and 31 for details on Researching and Tech Tiles). SHIPS Ships are used for Exploring and fighting opponents (players, the non-player Ancients, Guardians, and the GCDS). There are four kinds of Ships: eight per player. © Cruisers four per player. ¢ Dreadnoughts , two per player. © Starbases four per player. aOe GyA 1 Bigger Ships cost more to Build but have more spacefor Ship Parts. Starbases are immobile (see page 13 for details on Building and Moving Ships). BLUEPRINTS All Ships have Blueprints depicting their abilities (e.g. weapons, Initiative, Shields, etc.). Non-player Ship Blueprints are represented by Blueprint Tiles which do not change during the game. Player Ship Blueprints are represented on their Species Board and can be customized during the game using the Upgrade Action (see page 12 for details on Blueprints and Upgrading). Some Ship Blueprints have extra Ship Parts outside the Ship Part grid. These work justlike other Ship Parts except that they cannotbe replaced. Note: One DiscoveryTile provides a Ship Part that is placed outside the Ship Part grid (see page 9 for details on DiscoveryTiles). SHIP PARTS Ship Parts on Blueprints indicate which abilities a Ship has. They can be preprinted on player Species Boards or gained with the Upgrade Action. ManyShip Parts can only be Upgraded once their corresponding Tech Tile has been Researched (see page 12 for details on Ship Parts). STRUCTURES Structures are colossal objects Built in your Controlled Sectors. Orbitals provide an additional Population Square while Monoliths grant VP at the end of the game. Structures are permanent, remainingin the ORBITAL MONOLITHSector they are Built until the end of the game (see page 13 and 21 for details on Structures). ZONES AND RINGS The game boardis comprised of Zones, empty spaces where eachSectorcan be placed during the game with the Explore Action (see page for details on Exploring). Zones and Sectors are grouped into Rings: Inner (1), Middle (Il), and Outer (Ill). This correspondsto their distance from the Galactic Center Sector in the middle of the board. Rings are used to determine which type of Sector is revealed when Exploring a Zone during the Explore Action. SECTORS The game boardis built from hexagonal Sector tiles during the game. Each Sector represents a star system and may contain Population Squares representing worlds Producing Resources. There are three Sector Rings: Inner (I), Middle (Il) and Outer (Ill). Each Sector’s corresponding Ring is shown by the Roman numeral on its tile back. At the beginning of the game, only the Galactic Center Sector, Guardian Sector(s), and players' Starting Sectors are placed on the table; the rest are placed in the empty Zones of each Ring during the game (see page9for details on Sector placement). CONTENTS OF A SECTOR D Influence Space 9] vP value Wormhole §] Artifact B Population Square (Money) ff Population Square (Advanced Science) Population Square (Advanced Materials) EJ Sector Number [J Wormhole (No connection) [Wormhole Connection WORMHDLES Due to the immense distance between Sectors, Ships may only Move using the Wormhole network. The Wormhole networkis represented by the individual Wormholes on the edge(s) of Sector tiles (see Contents of a Sector figure above). Wormholes may normally only be used to Explore, Moveto, and Influence adjacent Sectorsif the edges connecting the Sector tiles each contain a Wormhole, creating a Wormhole Connection. GAME SOARD LAYOUT EXAMPLE AT GAME END NOTE The Inner and DV UetoSa iatseireicel cca lt laid out in concentric circles around the Center Sector. Outer Sectors may branch freely outwards. GAME GONCEPTS & RING |-INNER SECTORS  &  GALACTIC CENTER SECTOR  RING I -MIDDLE SECTORS  € STARTING SECTORS  RING Ill -QUTER SECTORS@  DISCOVERY TILES Some Sectors contain a re 7SERILITaA Discovery Tile which is awarded when the Sector is first Explored (in the case of unoccupied Sectors) or the Sector's defender is destroyed (in FRONT the case of occupied Sectors). Each DiscoveryTile is double-sided: the front showing one of various rewards (extra Resources, new Technologies, AncientShip Parts, etc.) and the back showing a 2 VP value. When awardeda Discovery Tile you BACK mustreveal it and decide whichside to use before ending your Activation (or the Combat Phaseif awarded during the Combat Phase, see page 9 for details on Discovery Tiles). AMBASSADOR TILES In games with four or more players, you can use your Ambassadors to form Diplomatic Relations with other players. Diplomatic Relations increase your Production and are worth VPat the end of the game(see page 15 for details on AmbassadorTiles and Diplomatic Relations). REPUTATION TILES You receive Reputation Tiles for participating in combat. They are worth VP at the end of the game (see page 21 for details on Reputation Tiles). LIMITED COMPONENTS Ships, Population Cubes,Influence Discs, Tech Tiles, Discovery Tiles, Reputation Tiles, Sectors, and AmbassadorTilesareall limited to the componentsincluded in the game. If they run out, they run out. UNLIMITED COMPONENTS All other game components are meantto be unlimited. If they run out, use the provided extra tiles or another substitute (see page 3 for details on component numbers). WARP PORTALS The Warp Portals are an optional module that opens up the galaxy, making it often possible to Move, Influence, and form Diplomatic Relations across the game board. The Warp Portals consist of three Sectors [one Middle (II) and two Outer (III)], one Discovery Tile, one Rare Tech, and one WarpPortal Tile. To use the Warp Portals module, shuffle the WarpPortals componentswith their respective base game components before setup. All Sectors with Warp Portals are considered to be adjacent to each other and have a full Wormhole Connection between them. You may Move,Influence, and form Diplomatic Relations through & WarpPortals. i Each game Round consists of four phases: ACTION PHASE Take Actions clockwise, one Action at a time until all players have Passed. COMBAT PHASE Resolve battles and conquer Sectors. UPKEEP PHASE Pay Civilization Upkeep Costs and Produce —d Resources. oo a es CLEANUP PHASE Return Influence Discs from Action Spaces to the Influence Track and draw newTech Tiles. —~ = => ~n aa Starting with the player holding the Start Player Tile, and moving clockwise, you may take one Action or Pass. This continuesuntil all players' Summary Tiles are flipped with the Reaction Overview faceup, at which point the Action Phase immediately ends. The number or type of Actions a player may take is only limited by the number ofInfluence Discs available on their Influence Track ACTIONS When taking an Action, move the leftmost Influence Disc from your Influence Track to the Action Space on your Action Track corresponding with the chosen Action. Stack subsequentInfluence Discs on topof any already occupying an Action Space; the same Action may be taken multiple times. The possible Actions are: EXP  ~  BUI  2)  RES  >>  MV  |  UPG  SC  INF  REACTION (UPGRADE, BUILD  OR MOVE)  PASSING The first time you Pass in a Round, flip your Summary Tile with the Reactions Overview faceup to remind other players you have Passed. The first player to Pass receives 2 Money and the Start Player Tile for the next Round. On subsequentActions, players who have Passed maytake one Reaction orPass. Reactions are weaker versions of the Upgrade, Build, and Move Actions (see page 14 for details on Reactions). ENTS — END OF ACTION PHASE The Action Phase ends immediately once all players' SummaryTiles are flipped with the Reactions Overview faceup. No more Reactions may be taken. COLONY SHIPS At any time during your Action or 3 Reaction you mayuse one or moreof your faceup > Colony Shipsby flipping them facedown. For each Colony Ship used this way, you may move one Population Cube from your Control Board to any empty Population Square in a Sector you Control. Each Population Cube you move must be taken from the Population Track that corresponds to the color of the Population Squareit is being placed on. Colony Ships are the only way to move Population Cubesto Sectors! GRAY POPULATION SQUARES The gray  j  planets (identified by both their color and  - rings) represent worlds that are suitable  a  ~  for any Production. The gray Population  °  Squares mayreceive a Population Cube  from any of the three Population Tracks. Population Cubes removedfrom gray Population Squares are returned to any Population Track. ADVANCED POPULATION SQUARES Population Squares with a star symbol (Advanced Population Squares) represent harsher worlds thatare difficult to colonize. You mayonly place Population Cubesin Advanced Population Squaresif you have Researchedthe related Advanced Tech. Gray Advanced Population Squares mayreceive a Population Cube & from any Population Track for which w NN you have Researched the related Tech . (ADVANCED MINING, ADVANCED LASS, ADVANCED ECONOMY, or METASYNTHESIS). F* DRBITALS Orbitals are artificial living ‘i if environments that you may Build. An Orbital may only receive a Population Cube from the Science or MoneyPopulation Tracks. Blue uses two Colony Ships and flips them facedown. They move two Population Cubesto the Sector. EXPLORE |\ EXPLORE EXAMPLE AMD canteaiiea 7 SECTORS ILLEGAL PLACEMENT LEGAL PLACEMENT In the diagram above, Sectors A and B would be legal placements. DISCOVERY TILES 3x +6 Materials, 3x +5 Science, 3x +8 Money, 2x +2 Materials ] +2 Science +3 Money: Gain the indicated Resources. gemmmy 3x Ancient Tech: Take the regular Tech Tile with ry the lowestprinted cost (see page 10for details on regular and Rare Techs) you don't already have from the Tech Tray and place it on your Species Board for free (in case of ties, you choose). gam 3x Ancient Cruiser: Place one of your Unbuilt eae Cruisers in the Sector wherefound. 7 2x AncientOrbital: Place an Orbital in the ‘ @ Sector where found and gain 2 Materials f oy = 1x Ancient Monolith: Place a Monolith in the qi Sector where found. r3fan @ 14x Ancient Ship Part: Place this Ship een Wocaey Part on any of your Ship Blueprints ee (returning an existing Ship Part if ae ame) "eeded). Alternately, keep this Ship ay some i Part next to your Species Board and weg place it as you would any other Ship a EN fiery Part with an Upgrade Action. Ancient a Att Snip Parts removed from Ship ea a Blueprints are removed 8 from the game. fey Muon Source: This Ship Part is placed outside your Ship Blueprint grid. Ancient WarpPortal: Place in the Sector where found. The Sector with the Warp Portal DiscoveryTile connects to all other Warp Portal Sectors and is worth 2 VP if Controlled at the end of the game (see page 7 for Warp Portal details). GoS The Explore Action allows you to discover new Sectors to colonize. Each Explore Action grants you the number of Explore Activations indicated by the Explore Action Icon on your Species Board. For each Explore Activation, choose one Unexplored Zone next to a Sector where you have Control or at least one Unpinned Ship (see page 13 for details on Pinning). Flip a Sector tile faceup from the stack corresponding to the chosen Zone's position on the Game Board(Ring|, Il, orIll: see page 7for details on Game Board layout). Next, choose whether to place the flipped Sector on the Zone you Exploredorto discardit. Note: In order to place the Sector being Explored, the edge of a Sector you can Explore from must have a Wormhole adjacentto the Zone being Explored (excepting players with the Wormhole Generator Tech, see page 10 for details). PLACING EXPLORED SECTORS Placed Sectors must DISCOVERYbe oriented in the Zone that was Explored so that a TILE SYMBOLS Wormhole Connection is made with a Sector where you WITH: have Control or at least one Unpinned Ship (excepting players with the WORMHOLE GENERATOR Tech, see page 10 fordetails). lf the placed Sector contains a Discovery Tile Symbol, place a Discovery Tile on it facedown. If the placed Sector also contains Ancient Symbols, place that many Ancients on top of the Discovery Tile. aDiscovery Tiles: As part of your Explore Activation, take the Discovery Tile from any undefended (i.e. containing no Ancients) Sector Explored this Action. Discovery Tiles ONE ANCIENTfrom Explored Sectors containing Ancients can only be awarded in the Combat Phase (see page 21 for details on Discovery Tiles in the Combat Phase). All Discovery Tiles are double sided: the front showing one ofvarious rewards and the back showing a 2 VP value. When a Discovery Tile is taken during an Explore Activation you TWO ANCIENTS mustreveal the tile and decide which side to use before the Activation is completed. Unless otherwise indicated, all Discovery Tiles are placed in a faceup Discard Pile next to the Tech and Upgrade Trays after granting a non-VP reward. Discovery Tiles that are kept for their VP value instead of being used for their variable reward are placed next to your Species Board, with the VP side faceup. After placing an Explored Sector, you may take Control of the Sector by placing the leftmost Influence Disc from your Influence Track on the Influence Space of the Sector. As with Discovery Tiles, you are not allowed to take Control of an Explored Sector containing Ancients until they are destroyed during the Combat Phase (see page 21 for details on Discovery Tiles in the Combat Phase). DISCARDING EXPLORED SECTORS if you do not wantto place an Explored Sector, discard it by placing it in a faceup Discard Pile near the corresponding Sector stack: (1), (Il), or (Ill). Discarding an Explored Sector ends your Explore Activation. Onceall of your remaining Explore Activations are completed, the Action Phase continues with play progressing to the nextplayer. If any Sector stack is empty, shuffle the corresponding Discard Pile and place it facedownin a new Sector stack. If at any time the Sector stack and corresponding Discard Pile are empty,the Explore Action for those Zones has no effect. Sey\ RESEARCH The Research Action allows you to Research new Techs. Each Research Action grants you the numberof Research Activations indicated by the Research Action Icon on your Species Board. For each Research Activation, you may TECH NAME Research one available Tech Tile from the Tech Tray by Paying its Science cost. . Place the Researched Tech Tile on Sti CORRESPONDINGthe leftmost available space of the Tech Trackof its category SHIP PART(Military ee: Grid EH,or Nano £63)on your Species Board. ENERGY CONSUMPTION If a Tech Track is full, no more Techs of that type may be FUSION DRIVE) ryResearched, nor may Rare Techs be placed there. You are not allowed to Research a Tech already present on your Species Board, nor are you allowed to discard a Researched Tech Tile from your Species Board. COST MINIMUM COSTEach Tech you havein a category gives you a discount on further Techs Researched in the same category (indicated by the lowest discount value 0 visible in that category on your Species Board). However, all Techs have a minimum Science RESEARCH EXAMPLEcost regardless of discounts available. Having already Researched the There are four typesof Techs: Ship Part: Gives the ability to Upgrade this Ship Parta) (see page 12 for details on Upgrading). » Build: Gives the ability to Build this Ship or Structure (see page 13 for details on Building). 3 Instant: Gives a one-time effect when Researched. Permanent: Givesan ability that is active until the end of the game. Researched Techscan also be worth VP. At the end of the game,each TechTrack (Military ¢°,, Grid EH, or Nano £93) scores the numberof VP shownin the leftmost VP symbol that has not been covered by a Tech Tile. =aeneee ra A Os: C2are @® a ee Coco zs it or)uwae artfre | Oe: CdOx Com e, i = aml? cre Cocos aee ee Cte 2@ } iic] iow aaraoeiAQe (ilo STARTING TECHNOLOGIES Some Species have starting Techs printed on their Tech Tracks. These are regarded in every way like Tech Tiles acquired through the Research Action and are not allowedto be covered with other Tech Tiles. RARE TECHS Unlike regular Techs, only one of each Rare Techis ever available per ; game. When Researched, RareTech Tiles maybeplaced on any Tech Track on your Species Board and you receive the discount applicable to the chosen track as if it were a regular Tech. Rare Techsarenot allowed to be chosenas a reward for the Ancient Tech Discovery Tile. NOTE Detailed descriptions of each Military, Grid, Nano, and Rare Tech are included on pages 11 and 31. MONOLITH and ORBITAL Techs, you receive a discount on Nano Techs. However, you would still Pay 3 Science to Research FUSION RIVE since that is its minimum cost. WORMHOLE GENERATOR If you have the WORMHOLE GENERATOR Tech you may Explore, Move to, and Influence adjacent Sectors as long as the edges connecting the Sectors contain at least one Wormhole. Moveand Influence In the example below, Movingto or Influencing Sectors A, B, C, and E would all be legal with the WORMHOLE GENERATOR Tech. Explore In the example below, D and are both legal Zones for Exploring with the WORMHOLE GENERATOR Tech as long as the edgeofthe placed Sectoris oriented with a Wormhole adjacent to the Sector being Explored from. MILITARY TECHNOLOGIES (>) RARE TECHNOLOGIES Neutron Bombs: When Attacking Population, all Population Antimatter Splitter: Allows youto split -Cubes in a Sector are destroyed automatically (see Attacking damage from Antimatter Cannons Population on page 21). freely over targets. Starbase: You may Build Starbases. Conifold Field: You may Upgrade your Ship Blueprints with CONIFOLD FIELD &Ship Parts. Plasma Cannon: You may Upgrade your Ship Blueprints with Neutron Absorber: Enemy NEUTRON ie PLASMA CANNON Ship Parts. 30N35 have no effect on you. Note:thisa Se fone Phase Shield: You may Upgrade your Ship Blueprints with does not affect Planta's Species weakness. PHASE SHIELD Ship Parts. AdvancedMining: You mayplace Population Cubesin Advanced Materials Population Squares with your Colony Ships. Tachyon Source: You may Upgrade your Ship Blueprints with TACHYON SOURCE Ship Parts. Gluon Computer: You may Upgrade your Ship Blueprints with GLUON COMPUTER Ship Parts. Plasma Missile: You may Upgrade your Ship Blueprints with er PLASMA MISSILE Ship Parts. ie B TECHNOLOGIES Gauss Shield: You may Upgrade your Ship Blueprints with GAUSS SHIELD Ship Parts. Fusion Source: You may Upgrade your Ship Blueprints with FUSION SOURCE Ship Parts. Improved Hull: You may Upgrade your Ship Blueprints with IMPROVED HULL Ship Parts. Positron Computer: You may Upgrade your Ship Blueprints with POSITRON COMPUTER Ship Parts. Cer ay Advanced Economy: You may place Population Cubes in Advanced MoneyPopulation Squares with your ColonyShips. Tachyon Drive: You may Upgrade your Ship Blueprints with TACHYON DRIVE Ship Parts. Antimatter Cannon: You may Upgrade your Ship Blueprints with ANTIMATTER CANNON Ship Parts. Quantum Grid: You receive two additional Influence Discs, placed immediately on your Influence Track. NANO TECHNOLOGIES [emai Nanorobots: You have one extra Activation when taking the Sil) Build Action. Fusion Drive: You may Upgrade your Ship Blueprints with | FUSION ORIVE Ship Parts. re Gf Orbital: You may Build Orbitals.@ oe [ire Advanced Robotics: You receive one additional Influence Absorption Shield: You may Upgrade your Ship Blueprints with ABSORPTION SHIELD Ship Parts. Cloaking Device: Two Ships are required to Pin each ofyour Ships (see page 13 for details on Pinning). ImprovedLogistics: Gain 1 additional MoveActivation during each Move Action you take. Sentient Hull: You may Upgrade your Ship Blueprints with SENTIENT HULL Ship Parts. Soliton Cannon: You may Upgrade your Ship Blueprints with SOLITON CANNON Ship Parts. Transition Drive: You may Upgrade your Ship Blueprints with TRANSITION DRIVE Ship Parts. Warp Portal: Immediately place the Warp Portal Tile on any Sector you Control. The Warp Portal Tile connects this Sector to all other Warp Portal Sectors and is worth 1 VP if Controlled at the end of the game (see page for WarpPortal details). Flux Missile: You may Upgrade your Ship Blueprints with FLUX MISSILE Ship Parts. Pico Modulator: Gain 2 additional Upgrade Activations during each Upgrade Action you take. Ancient Labs: Immediately draw and resolve one Discovery Tile (see page 9 for details on Discovery Tiles). Zero-Point Source: You may Upgrade your Ship Blueprints with ZERO-POINT SOURCE Ship Parts. Metasynthesis: You may place Population Cubesin any Advanced Population Squares with your Colony Ships. Aeh Disc, placed immediately on your Influence Track. is ay EX Advanced Labs: You may place Population Cubes in . 1 Advanced Science Population Squares with your Nee ColonyShips. au Monolith: You may Build Monoliths. € Wormhole Generator: You may Explore, Move to, and Influence adjacent Sectorsif the edges connecting theie Sectors contain one Wormhole. EI Artifact Key: For each Artifact ea on Sectors you Control, BL A immediately gain 5 Resourcesof a single type. caper i| UPGRADE os The Upgrade Action allows you to modify your Ship Blueprints. When you Upgradea Ship’s Blueprint with new Ship Parts, all Ships of that type are instantly Upgraded, regardless oftheir location. Blueprints are comprised of Ship Parts (pre-printed and/ or tiles placed with the Upgrade Action) assigned by Ship type (Interceptor, Cruiser, Dreadnought, Starbase) on your Species Board. Some Ship Blueprints have extra Ship Parts outside the Ship Part grid; these workjust like other Ship Parts except that they cannot be replaced. Each type of symbolon the Ship Parts of a Blueprint grants each Ship of that typea specific ability; the total value of each type of symbol on all Ship Parts for a given Blueprint determines that ability’s strength. Since many Ship Parts require Energy, the Energy Source(s) on each Blueprint (and Techs you’ve Researched) determine which other Ship Parts may be placed there. Each Upgrade Action grants you the number of Upgrade Activations indicated by the Upgrade Action Icon on your Species Board. With each Upgrade Activation you may,in the following order: INITIATIVEOS 30Hus SYMBOL REQUIRES ENERGY A TECH CONSUMPTION SHIP PART TILES Erin  FF  WEAPONS  * For each Die Symbol  Bon_  on your Ship Blueprint, roll one die of the corresponding color. The  SFE MISSILE oES  damagea Hit inflicts is represented  by burst symbols. Each burst 3  causes one point of damage.  COMPUTERS  + The total value of  Computers on your Ship Blueprint is  added to your die rolls to Hit.  igprm SHIELDS B The total value of Shields on your Ship Blueprint is subtracted Cert) from opponentdie rolls to Hit.2) * a 1) Return any numberofShip Part Tiles from your Ship Blueprints to the Upgrade Tray (exception: Ancient Ship Parts are removed from the game when removedfrom Ship Blueprints). 2) Move any one Ship Part Tile from the Upgrade Tray to any emptyor preprinted Ship Part Space on a Ship Blueprint on your Species Board, adhering to the following restrictions: © You must have Researchedthe requisite Tech, if any, for the moved Ship Part (see page 10 for details on Research). © Moved Ship Parts must not cause a Ship Blueprint's total Energy Consumption to exceed its total Energy Production. Drive Ship Part Tiles cannot be moved to Starbase Blueprints , as indicated by the jx} symbol on their Blueprint. ¢ At least one Drive Ship Part Tile must be present on Interceptor, Cruiser, and Dreadnought Ship Blueprints. DRIVES O The total value of Drives on your Ship Blueprint determines your Ship's MovementValue. ENERGY SAURCES WA The total value of Energy Symbols on your ShipPers Blueprint determinesits total *) So Mos Energy Production. SHIP HINIATURE SHAPEBUILD COST  SHIP TYPE  vesiuace  sOE  Sul?sil?  EXTRASHI? PART  INITIATIVE BONUS  Taking and returning Ship Parts costs nothing. All values from Ship Parts are cumulative. “17 UPGRADE EXAMPLE For their Action, Blue Upgrades. Blue’s Species Boardindicates that they receive | PRE-PRINTED 3 eed n oOeLGeN1 FUSION DRIVE from their Interceptor 2 Upgrade Activations: First they remove Wy) osBlueprint. Next they place 1 PLASMA CANNON 2 iI in its place and a GAUSS SHIELD in the open INTERCEPTOR BLUEPRINT SEFORE INTERCEPTOR BLUEPRINT AFTERShip Part Space (Blue is able to Upgrade with these Ship Parts since they have already Researched the corresponding Techs). Blue’s Interceptors will now havea total Energy Productionof 4 (3 from the NUCLEAR SOURCE +1 from the extra Ship Part outside the Blueprint Spaces), total Energy Consumptionof 4 (2 from the FUSION DRIVE + 2 from the PLASMA CANNON), Attack with 1 PLASMA CANNON die, and defend with -1 Shield. BASIC BUILDING COSTS INTERCEPTOR: 3 EY, CRUISER: 5 Q, DREADNOUGHT: 8 GS, STARBASE: 3, ORBITAL: 4 GS, MONOLITH: 10 ¢ BUILD EXAMPLE Blue choosesto Build for their Action. Their Species Board indicates that they get 2 Build Activations, so they Pay 5 Materials €9 to Build a Cruiser in their Starting Sector and 8 more Materials €9 to Build a Dreadnought in another Sector they Control. The Build Action allows you to Build Ships and Structures. Each Build Action grants you the numberofBuild Activations indicated by the Build Action Icon on your Species Board. For each Build Activation you may Build one Ship or Structure in any Sector you Control by Paying the Materials cost ‘) indicated on your Species Board and adhering to the following restrictions: ¢ You must have Researched the requisite Tech, for any Starbase or Structure Built (see page 10 for details on Research). ¢ Each Sector may have at most one Monolith and one Orbital. — A =~A\f MOVEMENT EXAMPLE \ ’s Interceptor has a Movement Value of 2 (2 NUGLEAR DRIVES) and their Cruiser has a Movement MOVE | Value of3. hasa total of 3 Move Activations. They Ges= Move the Interceptor twice and the Cruiser once. Green’s Interceptors also have a Movement Value of 2 and Green has 3 MoveActivations. When Moving, their first Interceptor can only Move1 Sector before being Pinned by the Interceptor. The second Interceptor, however, may Move through the Sector. Finally, Green decides not to use their third Move Activation. a:re EXO louans Cui The MoveAction allows you to Move your Ships. Each Move Action grants you the numberof MoveActivations indicated by the Move Action Icon on your Species Board. For each MoveActivation you may Move one Ship up to the number of Sectors determined by its Movement Value (total value of a Ship Blueprint’s Drives) while adhering to the following restrictions: © Ships may only Moveto Sectors with a Wormhole or Warp Portal Connection to the Sector being Moved from (excepting players with the WORMHOLE GENERATOR Tech, see page 10 for details). ¢ Ships are not allowed to Moveto Unexplored Zones. © Pinned Ships are not allowed to Movefrom a Sector containing opponent Ships. To determine if Ships are Pinned,total the numberof opponentShips in that Sector. Each opponent Ship in the Sector Pins one of your Ships (of your choosing). Pinning is determined for each Move Activation, so a Ship that was Pinned may become Unpinned later as the result of Building or Moving. © The GCDS Pins all Ships in the Galactic Center Sector. PRY Tape | oo| INFLUENCE y The Influence Action allows you to modify Control by moving Influence Discs to or from Sectors. Each Influence Action grants you the number ofInfluence Activations indicated by the Influence Action Icon on your Species Board in addition to flipping up to two of your used Colony Ships faceup. Each Influence Activation allows you to movean Influence Disc from your Influence Track or a Sector you Control to: ¢ An Uncontrolled Sector where no opponent Ships are present and a Wormhole or Warp Portal Connection exists with a Sector where you havea Ship or Control (excepting players with the WORMHOLE GENERATOR Tech, see page 10 for details). or ¢ An Uncontrolled Sector where only you have a Ship. or © The rightmost empty space of your Influence Track. You are notallowed to use more than one Influence Activation in the same Sector per Influence Action. REMOVING A DISC FROM A SECTOR If you remove an Influence Disc from a Sector, you mustalso return all Population Cubes from the Sectorto their respective Population Tracks on your Control Board. If a Population Cube is returned from a gray Population Square, you may choose which Population Track it is returned to. Similarly, if a Population Cubeis returned from an Orbital, you may return it to either the Science or Money Population Track. NOTE if Population Cube ever needs to be returned to a PopulationTrackthatis full, place the Population Cube on another Population Track of your choice. The track maybefilled completely, so that no numberis visible. This means that you do not Produce anyof that Resource. If a Population Track is full and you still need to return Population Cubestoit, the Population Cubes must go to any other Population Track. After you have Passedin the Action Phasethe only Actions you maytake are Reactions. To take a Reaction, move an Influence Disc from your Influence Track to the space on the Reaction Track of your Summary Tile that corresponds to the chosen Reaction. The possible Reactions are: (=| UPGRADE: Execute one Upgrade Activation. or >. BUILD: Execute one Build Activation. or >> MOVE: Execute one Move Activation. Techs granting extra Activations do not apply to Reactions! INFLUENCE EXAMPLE Blue Influences with 2 Influence Activations. For the first Influence Activation they decide between moving an Influence Disc from their Influence Track to Sector A, Sector B, or SectorG, ultimately choosing SectorA [J For the second Influence Activation, Blue returns the Influence Disc from the Sector they Control J] to the rightmost available space on their Influence Track. Finally, theyflip their two facedown Colony Ships faceup. REACTIONS EXAMPLE=) Blue Reacts with Build. TheyACTION PHASE /|zencrian| az pass }— movean Influence Disc fromPATE,COS their Influence Track to the BuildSigfryeEURU Breerrantae Space ontheir Reaction Track ames PLEcL and take 1 Build Activation. edReee DIPLOMATIC RELATIONS EXAMPLE In the example below, Green and may form Diplomatic Relations. Blue and are not allowed to, since 's Interceptor is in a Sector Blue Controls. Blue and Green are notallowed to form Diplomatic Relations either since their Interceptors are in the same Sector. May hold either an Ambassador or a Reputation Tile May hold only an Ambassador Tile May hold only a Reputation Tile ATRATARK NEROCott) Diplomatic Relations allow players to exchange their Ambassador Tiles to increase their Resource Production and gain VP. In gameswith four or more players, any two players mayat any time during their Action, propose Diplomatic Relations while adhering to the following restrictions: © Diplomatic Relations may only be proposed between players with a Wormhole Connection joining Sectors they Control. Diplomatic Relations cannot be proposed using the WORMHOLE GENERATOR. © Diplomatic Relations are not allowed to be proposed betweenplayersif either player’s Ships are presentin a Sector Controlled by or containing a Ship from the other player. © Diplomatic Relations are not allowed to be proposed between players who already have an Ambassador Tile from the other player. © Diplomatic Relations are not allowed to be formed between playersif either player holds the Traitor Tile or does not have an empty space on their Reputation Track (players may return Reputation Tiles to the Reputation Tile Bag or rearrange the tiles on their Reputation Track at any time as AMBASSADOR TILE long asthe tiles are placed in spaces that accommodatetheirtile type). If either player declines the proposed Diplomatic Relations, the current player simply continues their Action. If both players agree to the proposed Diplomatic Relations, they give each other one Ambassador Tile containing a Population Cube from anyoftheir Population Tracks. The Ambassador Tile and Population Cube are placed on any empty Ambassador Tile space on the Reputation Track of each player’s Species Board. Diplomatic Relations remain in effect until the end of the game, and youare notallowedto discard Ambassador Tiles voluntarily from your Reputation Track. Only an Act of Aggression can remove an opponent's Ambassador Tile from your Reputation Track, breaking Diplomatic Relations. An Act Of Aggression is defined as having any number of your Ships in a Sector where the other player has a Ship or Control at the end of your Action. Players who have Diplomatic Relations still Pin each other's Ships. Notethat this means that Moving through an opponent's Sectors is not an Act of Aggression if your Ships remain Unpinned (including Ships using the Cloaking Device)! BREAKING DIPLOMATIC RELATIONS When Diplomatic Relations are broken, each affected player returns the other player’s Ambassador Tile and Population Cube to its owner, who then returns the Ambassador Tile to their supply and places the Population Cube on their Population Track of choice. The player initiating the Act Of Aggression causing Diplomatic Relations to break receivesthe Traitor Tile from its previous holder or the supply. The player who holds the Traitor Tile is not allowed to form Diplomatic Relations and will receive a -2 VP penalty at the end of the game. ——d oo a [—] “~ = ad ~n aa WL hea (Terran), Eraka (Planta), (Mechanema) and Vernor (Hydran Progress) have already played a few Rounds, taking Control of Sectors and developing their civilizations. is the Start Player for this Action Phase. decides to BUILD. He movesthe leftmost Influence Disc from his Influence Track to the Build Action Space on his Action Track [J]. then Builds one Cruiser and one Orbital for 9 Materials “a , moving his Materials Storage Marker nine spaces backward on his Storage Track. was able to Build the Orbital since he has Researched the Orbital Tech. He places the Cruiser and the Orbital on his Sectors. Action is over, and it is Eraka's Action, as she sits clockwise nextto Eraka EXPLOREs and moves an Influence Disc to the corresponding Action Space. She chooses the Zone she wishes to Explore and flips the top Sector tile from the corresponding stack: in this case, Middle Sectors(Il). She decides whether to place the Sectorordiscardit, choosingto placeit]. She orients the Sector so that there is at least one Wormhole Connection betweenthe new Sector and one ofher Sectors. There is a Discovery Tile Symbol on the Sector, so she also immediately draws a random Discovery Tile. She reveals the tile and decides to keep it as VP, so she places it VP-side faceup next to her Species Board. Eraka then decides to take Control of the Sector, moving the leftmost Influence Disc from her Influence Track to the Sector’s Influence Space J. Finally, she decidesto colonize the MoneyandScience Population Squares on the newly placed Sector by flipping two Colony Ships facedown and moving one Population Cube from her Moneyand Science Population Tracks to the Population Squares on the Sector J. Planta receives 2 Explore Activations per Explore Action, so Eraka Explores anotherZone fj,this time in the Outer Sector (Ill) Ring. The Sector she flips from the stack isn’t to her liking so she discards it, placing it faceup next to the Outer Sectors(Ill) stack. When the Outer Sectors (Ill) stack is depleted, its discards will be shuffled into a new OuterSectors(Ill) stack. Fee eee: ee ee ee It’s now Jolhheammefs Action. She decides to UPGRADE her Ships, moving an Influence Disc to the Upgrade Action Space on her Action Track. Mechanema’sspecial ability allows her to take 3 Upgrade Activations per Upgrade Action. She first returns an ELECTRON COMPUTER tile from the Interceptor Blueprint on her Species Board [J and then takes a PLASMA MISSILE tile, a POSITRON COMPUTER tile and an ION CANNON tile from the Upgrade Tray. She places the PLASMA MISSILE tile on her Interceptor and the POSITRON COMPUTER and I0N CANNON tiles on her Cruiser]. is allowed to take PLASMA MISSILE and POSITRON COMPUTER tiles, since she has Researched the related Techs BJ. Vernor RESEARCHes: he moves an Influence Disc to the Research Action Space and chooses NANDRIIITS from the Tech Tray. He already has four Nano Techs, which would grant him a discount of 6. but the minimum cost for NANDRDBITS is 2 Science. . He Pays the Science cost, moving his Science Storage Marker 2 spaces backward on his Storage Track, and places the NANORO3ITS Tech Tile on his Species Board [ffi]. As the Hydran Progress receive 2 Research Activations per Research Action, Vernor decides to also Research the WORMHOLE GENERATOR. The discount is now d. so the cost is 8 Science .He Pays the cost and places the Tech Tile on his Species Board I. PAoa This example uses some Alien Species. Their special abilities are presented in more detail on pages 26-27. It is Alastair's Action again. He EXPLOREs an Outer (Ill) Zone andflips a Sector with one DiscoveryTile Symbol and two Ancients Symbols. After placing the Sectorhe places a random Discovery Tile facedown on the Sector with two Ancients on top. He is not allowed to take Control of the Sector before the Ancients are destroyed. Eraka EXPLOREs again. This time she goesfor a Zonein the Outer (III) Ring and, after deciding to place it, Explores in the Outer (Ill) Ring again. She choosesto place the second Sector on the board as well iE. She flips her remaining two Colony Ships facedown and places a Population Cube from her Money Population Track and a Population Cube from her Materials Population Track on thefirst Sector. Sheis allowed to place a Population Cube on the Advanced Materials Population Square[fq since she has Researched the ADVANCED MINING Tech§. The remaining Population Squares on the Sectors remain empty since she has no more faceup Colony Ships available. Eraka now also has a Wormhole Connection from oneof herSectors to oneofAlastair's Sectors ff. She is thus able to propose Diplomatic Relationsto Alastair. Alastair agrees, so they give each other one Ambassador Tile, along with one Population Cube from the Population Track of their choosing. The Ambassador Tiles are placed on their Reputation Tracks, however, Alastair's track is already full of Reputation Tiles, so he returns one of them to the Reputation Tile Bag fi. Passes, turning her SummaryTile so that the Reactions Overview is faceup [. Since sheis the first player to Pass this Round, she getsthe Start Player Tile, 2 Money So. and will be the first to act in the Action Phase next Round. Vernor chooses MOVE and sets out to Attack his neighbor Johanne. He MovestwoInterceptors to one ofJohanna’s Sectors that contains three Interceptors §EJ (the WORMHOLE GENERATOR Tech allows Vernor's Ships to Move to the Sector without a Wormhole Connection). Vernor and had earlier established Diplomatic Relations, now broken by Vernor's Act Of Aggression. They return the other player’s Ambassador Tile and place their Ambassador Tile Population Cube on Population Track of their choice. Vernor also takes the Traitor Tile, preventing other players from forming Diplomatic Relations with him as long as he holds it. If he retains the Traitor Tile until the end of the game, he will receive a —2 VP penalty. It is Alastair's Action. He Passes and flips his Summary Tile so the Reactions Overviewis faceup. Eraka chooses INFLUENCE. She has 2 Influence Activations and decides to movetheInfluence Discs from the two Sectors she Controls without Population Squares. One Influence Disc Pj] is movedto the Uncontrolled Sector with two Population Squares and the other MJ she returns to her Influence Track. After this, she flips two Colony Ships faceup and immediately uses the Ships again, flipping them facedown and placing two Population Cubesin her Sectors PX. Jofemma, having Passed earlier, may only take a REACTION or Pass. She decidesthat the three Interceptors presentin her Sector are notsufficient to defend against Vernor's Attack, so she chooses a MOVE REACTION (placing an Influence Disc on the Reaction Track on her Summary Tile PR). She uses the 1 Move Activation the Reaction gives her to Moveone Cruiser to the contested Sector PZ. Vernor chooses MOVE and Movesone additional Interceptor and Cruiser to the contested Sector Pi (the Cruiser's FUSION DRIVE allowsit to Move two Sectors to join the battle in a single Move Activation). Alastair doesn’t feel the need to take a Reaction and Passes. Eraka also Passes, as do Johiemme and Vernor. Since all players’ Summary Tiles show the Reactions Overview faceup, the Action Phase ends immediately and the Combat Phase begins. There is one battle to be resolved, between and Vernor. (See combat example on pages 22-23). PL ELLs The CombatPhaseconsists ofsix steps: DETERMINE BATTLES Identify all Sectors containing opposingShips. RESOLVE BATTLES Resolve battles by Sector Number in descending numerical order. ATTACK POPULATION Ships attack opponent Population Cubes in their Sector. INFLUENCE SECTORS Players may take Control of Uncontrolled Sectors where they have Ships. DISCOVERY TILES Undefended DiscoveryTiles are claimed. REPAIR DAMAGE All Ship damageis reset by returning Damage Cubes to the supply. aTaS The CombatPhaseis when battles are resolved. A battle takes place if a Sector is occupied by more than one opponent (player or non-player such as Ancients, Guardians, or the GCDS). Battles are resolved in descending numerical order as determined by the Sector Number printed on each Sector tile. Battles with multiple opponents are resolved between two players at a time in reverse order of entry into the Sector, with non-player Ships battling the last surviving player. For each battle, the player who first entered the Sector is considered the Defenderand theplayer whoenteredlastis considered the Attacker.If a player Controls the Sector where the battle is taking place, that player is always considered the Defender and will battle last, regardless of when their Ships entered the Sector. NATE Ancients =, Guardians {phe and GCDs & are always considered Defenders. EL tae) Battles are resolved througha series of repeated Engagement Rounds,until all of one player’s Ships have Retreated orare destroyed. Each Engagement Round, Ships Activate by type, in Initiative order, attempting to Hit opposingShipsby rolling the dice corresponding to the Cannonspresenton their Ship Blueprints. ENGAGEMENT ROUND Every Engagement Round each Ship type is Activated in Initiative order. When Activated, the owning player decides whether that Ship type will Attack or Retreat. Engagement Rounds are repeated until all of one player’s Ships have Retreated or are destroyed. INITIATIVE Initiative determines the order of Attack in an Engagement Roundandis determinedbytotaling the number ofInitiative Symbols A on the Blueprint of each Ship type. Initiative ties between opponentsare resolvedin favor of the Defender (you choosethe order ofAttack for your Ships that aretied for Initiative). BATTLE RESOLUTION ORDER EXAMPLE The player is already present in the Sector. Green Movestherefirst followed by Blue. Green and Blue will battle first, and will then battle the survivor. romBL ocr cao E )ynal 10; The Interceptor's Initiative is 4: 2 for the Ship's Initiative Bonus +2 for the Initiative Symbols on the FUSION DRIVE. The Blue Dreadnought's Initiative is 3: O for the Ship's Initiative Bonus +1 +1 +1 for the three NUCLEAR DRIVES. SHIP BATTLE DICE EXAMPLE Using the Ship Blueprints above, the player would roll three yellow dice: one for the ION CANNON on each oftheir Interceptors. Blue would roll two yellow dice and two orange dice. umnfri  asianSey  BETOatte  Ber  5is, 2ar  |1  @  Paes is i  Cae Is  Econ)nelsUO & Ey  Geecieeccs(eslis a  era  fae  rN  Sons Coors for 3-2@ 1@J3@ 5). NOTE Only one Blueprint Tile of each type (Ancient @=, Guardian pe, GCDS @) is used each game. Choose your favorites or randomly determine which will be used during setup. ANCIENTS GUARDIANS ALACTIC CENTER DEFENSE SYSTEM (GCOS) Oh ADVANCED BLUEPRINT TILES are marked with two notches on their border. They present a greater challenge than normal Blueprint Tiles and should only be used with experienced players. RETREAT EXAMPLE The Green Interceptor decides to Retreat from SectorA. It may Retreat to SectorB (only their own Influence Disc) but not to C (not under their Control), D (empty)or E (contains an opponentShip). cannot Retreat anywhere. ATTACKING tn Initiative order, each Ship type may make an Attackby rolling one die of the correspondingcolorfor every Die Symbol presenton their Ship Blueprint. All dice of all colors for each Ship typeare rolled simultaneously. After rolling, each die is assigned to a single opponent Ship (including multiple dice to the same opponent Ship) to determineifit is a Hit (see combat example on pages 22-23). HITTING Die results displaying one or more bursts * are always considereda Hit, and die results displaying a blank face are always considered a Miss, regardless of any bonuses Ships may have. Determine the Hit Value for other die results by adding the value of your Computersto the die roll and subtracting the value of the target’s Shields. If the Hit Value for a die is greater than or equal to 6, the attack is a ee ic)Hit and deals damage. = = i DAMAGE Hits inflict damage equal to the numberofbursts — a% on their weapon's Die Symbol. Ships that receive damage ca greater than their Hull Value (total value of Hull on their > i>—]Blueprint) are destroyed. When you destroy an opponent's oo Ship, take the miniature and place it next to your Species Board to help track how many Reputation Tiles (see page 21 for details on Reputation Tiles) you draw at the conclusion of the battle. Damage exceeding a Ship’s Hull Value is not allowedto be assigned to another Ship. Mark any damage to Ships that are not destroyed by placing one Damage Cube per damage nextto its miniature. RETREAT To attempt to Retreat your Ships during a Ship Activation, move all your Ships of that type to the edge of a neighboring Sector with a Wormhole Connection (excepting players with the WORMHOLE GENERATOR Tech, see page 10 for details) to show they are Retreating. You may only Retreat to a Sector you Control where no opponent Ships are present. On their next Ship Activation, any Retreating Ships may complete their Retreat by moving to the neighboring Sector. Retreated Ships are not allowed to Attack or be Attacked during the current battle but areeligible to be Attacked until they have been movedto the neighboring Sector. HITS AND DAMAGE WITH NON-PLAYER OPPONENTS When you battle non-player opponents,any other playerrolls the dice for Ancient, Guardian, and GCDS Attacks. If possible, dice are assigned so that your Ships are destroyed from largest to smallest. If none of your Ships can be destroyed in the Attack, dice are assignedto inflict as much damageto your Ships as possible, from largest to smallest. NON-PLAYER OPPONENT BATTLE DAMAGE EXAMPLE 5 The Ancientsrolled 5 and %, 2 game €for two Hits. The Interceptor riis the only player Ship that can be destroyed, so one ; of the diceis assigned to = > it. The other is assigned F to the largest player Ship possible, in this case the Dreadnought. eTAy STEPS OF BATTLE (PER SECTOR) 1) Determine orderofplayer battle resolution 2) Determine Attacker and Defender 3) Determine Initiative 4) Fire Missiles 5) Repeated Engagement Rounds For battles with more than two opponents, repeat steps 1-5 until a single opponent's Ships remain After all battles are resolved 6) Draw Reputation Tiles 7) Return destroyed Ships Battles in each Sector are resolvedin five steps: 1) Determinethe order ofplayer battle resolution; players battle each other twoat a time in reverse order of entry into the Sector. 2) Determine Attacker and Defender based on reverse order of entry into the Sector; players Controlling the Sector always act as the Defender regardlessof their order of entry. 3) Determine Initiative for each Ship type. 4) Missiles(if any) are fired once, by Ship type,in Initiative order. 5) Repeat Engagement Rounds until all of one player's Ships have Retreated or are destroyed. For battles with more than two opponents, repeat steps 1-5 until a single opponent's Ships remain. After all battles in a Sector have been resolved: 6) All players who participated in the battle draw and select Reputation Tiles, one player at a time, in order of entry into the Sector. 7) Return any destroyed Ships to their owners. Proceedto resolve additional battles in descending Sector Number order. STALEMATE tf a situation arises whereit is not possible for either player to destroy the other's Ships (when all Ships in a battle are unarmedor only armed with Missiles), the attacker must Retreat (see page 19 for details on Retreating) or their Ships are destroyed. REPUTATION TILES After all battles in a Sector have been resolved, each player who participated in battle draws up to a maximum of five Reputation Tiles from the Reputation Tile Bag as follows: * 1 tile for participating in one or more battles. * 1 tile for each opponent Interceptor, Starbase, or Ancient destroyed. 2 tiles for each opponent Cruiser or Guardian destroyed. A © 3 tiles for each opponent Dreadnought destroyed. ¢ 3 tiles for destroying the GCDS. Drawing ReputationTiles is donein orderof player entry into the Sector, with each player drawing their Reputation Tiles and selecting up to oneto place facedownontheir Reputation Track (returning any other drawn Reputation Tiles to the Reputation Tile bag) before the next player drawstheir Reputation Tiles. If your Reputation Track is full, you may choose to return any Reputation Tile from your Reputation Track to the Reputation Tile Bag to make room for anewly drawn Reputation Tile. You may rearrange the tiles on your Reputation Track at any time as long as the tiles are placed in spaces that accommodate their tile type. MISSILE EXAMPLE UU All Ship types with Missiles fire their > Missilesin Initiative order. For each Hy Ship type, roll dice of the corresponding “= l color equal to the numberof Die Symbols shown on Missile Ship Parts on your Ship Blueprint(e.g. two orangedice for each PLASMA MISSILE Ship Part). AUC Ne LG nee Cc) i. SU 7esse toa . Pa pees PesceOL Ve: STARBASEaw Ty Kinser aE NCO REPUTATION TILE DISTRIBUTION fw a 2 1 ATTACKING POPULATION EXAMPLE The Interceptors attack Blue's Population once with their PLASMA CANNONS, rolling three orange dice. One die Hits (# is always a Hit), but the other two Miss. removestwoof Blue's Population Cubes from the Sector. alpsPereanes RETREAT PENALTY if all of your remainingShips attempt to Retreat from a battle, you do not draw a Reputation Tile for participating in the battle, but still draw Reputation Tiles for destroyed opponent Ships.  RETURN DESTROYED SHIPS After players have drawn Reputation Tiles, all destroyed opponent Ships near your Species Board are returned to their owner and can be Built again in future Rounds.  ULaEh3  After all battles have been resolved, the Combat Phase concludes with carrying out the remaining CombatPhasesteps:  1) Attack population. 2) Influence Sectors. 3) DiscoveryTiles. 4) Repair Damage.  — ef oo = P=  ATTACKING POPULATION At the end of the CombatPhase, remaining Ships attack opponent Population Cubes in their Sector. When Attacking de Population Cubes, each Ship may attack once with 2 2 Pi its non-Missile weapons, using the normal rules to Hit (Population Cubes are considered to have O Shield Value). Each damageinflicted destroys one Population Cube of the attacker's choosing.  = Fr)  NOTE: if you have Researched the NEUTRON 30M3S Tech, all Population Cubesin the Sector may be destroyed automatically.  Destroyed Population Cubes are returned to the defeated player’s corresponding Graveyards on their Control Board. These Population Cubes are returned to their respective Population Tracks during the Cleanup Phase (see page 25 for details on the Cleanup Phase). If a Population Cube is destroyed from a gray Population Square, the owner may choose which Graveyardit is returned to. Similarly,if a Population Cube is destroyed from an Orbital, the owner may return it to either the Science or MoneyGraveyard.  DRBITALS AND MONDLITHS Orbital and Monolith Structures cannot be destroyed, nor are they ever removed from Sector. However, an Orbital's Population Cube may be Attacked in the same wayas other Population Cubesin a Sector.  INFLUENCE SECTORS At the end of the CombatPhase, if you have at least one Ship in a Sector (including Sectors where no battle took place) that has no Population Cubes(including Orbitals), removethe Controlling player's Influence Disc and place it on their Influence Track. Next, you may moveInfluence Discs from your Influence Track to any Sector where you have a Ship and no InfluenceDisc is present (including Sectors where other players' Influence Discs were just removed).  DISCOVERY TILES At the end of the Combat Phase,if you have at least one Ship in a Sector with a DiscoveryTile, take the tile (see page 9 for details on Discovery Tiles).  REPAIR DAMAGE At the end of the CombatPhase, removeall Damage Cubes from Ships.  Once all Combat Phase steps are completed, play proceeds with the Upkeep Phase.  Eefra i [—) =" i] al = a] = ad on mn Johanna and V are engagedin battle. Johamma is the Defender and th is the only battle this Round. The combatbeginswith theShipsfiring their Missiles. will roll two orangedicefor the PLASMA MISSILES on each Interceptor, Hitting with a roll of +. ntVe r will roll two orange dice for the PLASMA MISSILES on each Interceptor, Hitting with a ##, and two orangedice for the PLASMA MISSILES on the Cruiser, Hitting with a ##. The Initiative order is: Initiative 4 (Ship Initiative Bonus 2 + FUSION DRIVE 2 = 4). Johenna’s Interceptors Initiative 3 (Ship Initiative Bonus 2 + NUCLEAR DRIVE 1 =3; Defender first). eV s Cruiser Initiative 3 (Ship Initiative Bonus 1 + FUSION DRIVE 2 = 3). i rr rolls sa, #4, 5,4, 3 and 2 for the PLASMA MISSILES onhis Interceptors. He decidesto assign the ##'s to two Sas Interceptors. The rest of the rolls are Misses. JSohanne's Interceptors both receive two points of damage, ae their Hull Value of 0, and are destroyed. r takes the Ships and puts them next to his Species Board. rolls #% and #4 for the PLASMA MISSILES on her remaining Interceptor. She assigns one ## to one of V Interceptors and the other## to \ 'Sr's Cruiser.\ Interceptor receives two points of damage, exceeding its Hull Value of0, and is destroyed. J @) takes the Ship and puts it next to her Species Board. V s Cruiser receives two points of damage, equal to its Hull Value of 2. Two Damage Cubes are placed nextto his Cruiser to mark the damage. o r then rolls 3 and 2 for the PLASMA MISSILES on his Cruiser, which result in Misses. The battle continues with ENGAGEMENT ROUNDS. Jofemma now has one Interceptor and one Cruiser remaining. r has two Interceptors and one Cruiser. Johannes Interceptor will roll one yellow die for its l0N CANNON that Hits either type of Vernor's Ships with a roll of ¥. Jofiamma’s Cruiser will roll two yellow dice for its twoIN CANNONS, Hitting\ r's Interceptors (which have no Shields) with a roll of 4 or higher and Vernor's Cruiser with a roll of 5 or higher (GAUSS SHIELI subtracts 1 from the Hit Value of each die assigned to it). Vernor will roll one yellow die for the IN CANNN on each Interceptor, Hitting either of Jofamma’s Ships with roll of * , and one orangedie for the PLASMA CANNON on the Cruiser, Hitting either Ship with roll of ##. The Initiative order is: ¢ Vernor's Interceptors Initiative 4 (Ship Initiative Bonus 2 + FUSION DRIVE 2 = 4). Johamners Interceptor Initiative 3 (Ship Initiative Bonus 2 + NUCLEAR DRIVE 1 = 3; Defender first). ¢ Joanna's Cruiser Initiative 3 (Ship Initiative Bonus 1 + FUSION dRIVE 2 = 3; Defender first). ¢ Vernor's Cruiser Initiative 3 (Ship Initiative Bonus 1 + FUSION DRIVE 2 = 3). Bi Vernordecidesto Retreat his Interceptors, moving them between the current Sector and the Sector he wantsto Retreatto. Bi) Joftemma Attacks with her Interceptor and rolls for the 10N CANNON: 3, a Miss. B Joana Attacks with her Cruiser and rolls for the 19N CANNONS: 4 and 2. She assigns the 4 to one ofthe Retreating Interceptors, destroying it. She places the destroyed Ship next to her Species Board. The roll of 2 is a Miss. VernorAttacks with his Cruiser and rolls for the PLASMA CANNON: #%, which he assigns to remaining Interceptor. It is destroyed and Vernor placesit next to his Species Board. Thefirst Engagement Roundendsand next begins. B Vernor's remaining Interceptor Retreats, moving to the neighboring Sector. Attacks with her Cruiser and rolls for the 10N CANNONS: blank and 2, Misses. PB) Vernor Attacks with his Cruiser and rolls a ##. He assigns it to Cruiser, which receives two points of damage and is destroyed. Vernor places the destroyed Ship next to his Species Board. Hy The battle ends, as Jolamme’’s final Ship is destroyed. Since there are no more opponentShipsin the Sector, and this was the only battle of the Combat Phase, players draw Reputation Tiles. As the Defender, drawsa total of three Reputation Tiles: one for participation in the battle and two for the destroyed Interceptors (one for each). She looks at them and keepsthe highestone, placing it facedown on her Reputation Track. Johanna then returns the two unchosen Reputation Tiles to the Reputation Tile Bag. Vernor earned six Reputation Tiles in the battle: one for participation in the battle, three for the destroyed Interceptors (one for each), and two for the destroyed Cruiser. Vernor only draws five Reputation Tiles, however, as that is the maximum number of Reputation Tiles that can be drawn per battle. He looks at the Reputation Tiles and keeps the highest one, returning the rest to the Reputation Tile Bag. Nowthatall players have drawn Reputation Tiles, destroyed Ships are returned to their owners. All battles have been resolved, so the Combat Phase continues with Attack Population. Vernor may nowAttackJohanna’s Population Cubesin the Sector. He rolls a #® for the PLASMA CANNON on his Cruiser, destroying Jefamma's Money Population Cube. The Population Cubegoesto Johannes Graveyard. The next step of the Combat Phase is Influence Sectors. Since no Population Cubesare presentin Jofemma’s Sector, her Influence Disc is returned to herInfluence Track. Vernor may nowplacehis ownInfluence Disc in the Sector and doesso.Finally, he removes the Damage Cubes from his Cruiser. The Combat Phase ends and play proceeds with the Upkeep Phase. ee ey = = uo — a ca > —] oo During the Upkeep Phase, players use their Income to Pay their Civilization Upkeep Cost. Then they Produce Materials and Science Resources according to the Population Cubes they have moved to planets. COLONY SHIPS All players may activate any  >  remaining Colony Ships (see Colony Ship details  = |  on page 8) to move Population Cubes to Sectors.  Important: unlike the Action Phase, Colony Ships are not allowedto be used during the Upkeep Phase to move Population Cubesto Sectors containing opponentShips. CIVILIZATION UPKEEP After using ColonyShips,collect your Income and Pay your Civilization Upkeep Cost. This is done by comparing your Money Income (the highest exposed number on your Money Population Track) with your Civilization Upkeep Cost for that Round (the highest exposed number on your Influence Track). Adjust your Money Storage Marker on your Storage Track by the net difference between your Income and Civilization Upkeep Cost; gain Moneyfora positive net difference and Pay Moneyfor a negative net difference. BANKRUPTCY? At no time may your Money Storage Marker movebelow zero on your Storage Track. You must Trade Materials and/or Science for Moneyto Pay your Civilization Upkeep Cost or Abandon Control of Sectors until your Civilization Upkeep Cost is small enough to be paid using the Moneyyou have. Whena Sectoris Abandonedits Influence Disc is returned to the Influence Track (decreasing your Civilization Upkeep Cost), and all Population Cubes from the Sectorare returnedto their respective Population Tracks (Population Cubes from gray Population Squares may be returned to any Population Track and Population Cubes from Orbitals may be returnedto either the Science or Money Population Track; if a Population Cube needs to be returned to a PopulationTrackthatis full, place the Population Cube on another Population Track of your choice.). Note that Abandoning Sectors may cause Population Cubes on MoneyPopulation Squaresto return to the Money Population Track, reducing Income (and the ability of AbandoningSectors to keep yourcivilization solvent). PLAYER ELIMINATION tn the unlikely event thata playeris unable to Pay their Civilization Upkeep Cost after Trading and Abandoning Sectors, their civilization has collapsed and they are eliminated from the game. Likewise, players in the unlikely situation of having neither Ships nor Controlled Sectors on the board at the end of the Combat Phase are also eliminated from the game. Eliminated players count their score and return all of their game components to the game box. MATERIALS AND SCIENCE PRODUCTION After Paying your Civilization Upkeep Cost, collect your Materials and Science Production by gaining Materials and Science Resources equal to the highest exposed number on your respective Materials and Science Population Tracks. TRADE At any time, as many times as you choose and are able, you may Pay the numberof one Resourceindicated by the Trade Value on your Species Board, to gain one Resource (Materials @9 , Science , Money of any other kind. UPKEEP PHASE EXAMPLE ehMeekeee neh 20 heee ee The Blue player has an Incomeof 4 and Civilization Upkeep Cost of 5 ( _ ) . As the sum of these is 4-5 = —1, they must Pay one Moneyfor their civilization to remain solvent. If their Money Storage Marker is at 0, they must either Trade other Resources for Money or Abandon Sectors until their Civilization Upkeep Costis less than or equal to their Income. Abandoning one Sector without a Population Cube on a MoneyPopulation Square would change their Civilization Upkeep Costto 3 allowing them to Pay their full Civilization Upkeep Cost and gain one Money. After Paying their Civilization Upkeep Cost, Blue would then collect 6 Materials @§ and 3 Science as their Materials and Science Production. meee  «NEW TECH TILES  >  +  2 players: 5  0 3 players: 6  °  Po  a  4 players: 7  rs  A  5 players: 8  6 players: 9  Yellow scores 6 VP (1+1+4) for Reputation Tiles, 1 VP for the Planta Ambassador Tile, 12 VP (3+2+2+4+1) for Controlled Sectors, 3 VP for their Monolith, 4 VP (2+2) for Discovery Tiles, -2 VP for the Traitor Tile, 3 VP (1+2) for progress on Tech Tracks, and 2 VP (1+1) for their Species Ability (1 VP per Ancient on the game boardat the end of the game) for a total of 29 VP. SPECIES 3ONUSES  DESCENDANTS OF  PLANTA  DRACO  1 extra VP for  1 VP per Ancient  each Controlled  on the game board  Sector at the end  at the end of the  of the game  game  Haba Draw Tech Tiles from the Tech Tile Bag until the indicated numberofregularTech Tiles for your player count has been drawn, placing drawn Tech Tiles in the appropriate slots of the Tech Tray. Rare Tech Tiles do not count toward the numberofTech Tiles drawn for the Cleanup Phase. Moveall Influence Discs from your Action Track back to your Influence Track and any Population Cubes from your Graveyardto their respective Population Tracks. If a Population Track is full, place the Population Cube on another Population Track of your choice. Finally,flip all of your Colony Ships faceup and your SummaryTile with the Action Phase Overview side up. Move the Round Marker one step forward on the Tech Tray. A new Round starts, beginning with the Action Phase. The game ends after the 8th Round. The player with the mostVPis the winner. In the caseof a tie, the tied player with the highest total amountof Resourcesin their Storage (Materials 3 Science , and Money 6 is the winner. Players gain VICTORY POINTS (VP) from: ¢ Reputation Tiles [Combat Phase] 1-4 VP per tile Ambassador Tiles [Diplomatic Relations 4+ players only] 1VP per tile Controlled Sectors [Explore, Influence, Combat Phase] 1-4 VP per Sector Monoliths on Controlled Sectors [Build] 3 VP per Monolith DiscoveryTiles kept VP side up [Explore, CombatPhase] Paeles Traitor Tile aaa Progress on each Tech Track [Research] 4 Tech Tiles on a track = 1 VP eaea Catal Ate Species bonuses SSS Scoring and Traitor Tiles Pres AN Sigalaa an CU CCMEktaaeim /|1V2/ TILE | |cantaauea sectars:| eeeLs | gy TEUPr LeeOnc BRET RENT0Sta }.AS 2VP/ TILE ey | raarroacaza: ee ry POTNORRa IP OUTSeeOA) —— species sanuses }—— eaOb Excerpts from the Archive ofHistory, Library of the Galactic Center Epsilon Eridani, the capital system of the Empirein its heyday, was sight yetunrivalled: whole moons(somerecords claim even planets) were shapedto celebrate the might and wisdom of the Forever Emperor. Their wealth was beyond anything ever documented. Yet, after surviving through whatthey call the Silent Era, the Empire has been reduced to rubble. The resources of the capital system have been depleted and mostoftheir power disintegrated, yet the Heirs have not given up hope. The new dawn mayrise in the @ ERIDANI EMPIRE uncharted systems.  SETUP AND STATS  SPECIES RULES  4 Materials G9  9  Draw two random Reputation Tiles before the  2 Science  game starts, and place them facedown on your  26 Money  Reputation Track.  < 2 Oo Start with two fewer Influence Discs (leave your3 Colony Ships twoleftmostInfluence Track spaces empty). Techs GAUSS SHIELD, These Ship Blueprints have additional Energy Production: FUSION DRIVE, PLASMA CANNON Sector 222 ACTIVATIONS PER ACTION 34O98090 b-.Trade Value} @ 10 Neversatisfied, never complete, the Progress are everstriving further. The HydransMa HYDRAN PROGRESS have long since embracedtechnologyas their main interest, constantly evolving and augmenting their society and even themselves with new inventions. The speedof their technological progress is unparalleled among the Seven. Although very difficult to access by the layman,the universities and laboratories of Beta Hydri are held in very high esteem by the scientists of all species. SETUP AND STATS SPECIES RULES 2 Materials @ y During game setup, place a Population Cube 6 Science in the Advanced Science Population Square on your Starting Sector.2 Money 3 Colony Ships > Tech ADVANCED LABS Sector 224ACTIVATIONS PER ACTION 1+ 9OOO000 wr Trade Value 3 810) Even thoughtheyare by far the mostdifferent species of the Seven, the Planta have long6 PLANTA been a steady Council member. Being a moss-like species with a distributed sentience, their intentions are sometimesdifficult to decipher. After overgrowing mostof the planets and moonsin the Cygnus system, they seem to be contentwith just expandingtheir lush growthin new systems,fully co-operating with the other species, who mostly regard them as harmless companions. The Planta are phenomenalnavigators, which makes them very respectedin interspecies tradingvessels. SETUP AND STATS SPECIES RULES 4 Materials ws Your Population Cubes are automatically destroyed by 3 Science opponent Ships at the end of the Combat Phase. 2 Money (J 1 extra VP for each Controlled Sector at the end fth H4 Colony Ships > SU SN Tech STARBASE All Ship Blueprints have reduced Initiative Bonuses. ACTIVATIONS PER ACTION Sector 226 All Ship Blueprints have additional Computers and Energy Production but haveone less Ship Part Space:OOqoooo 25Reputation Track 2 22 Clelele) Trade Value3 & 10 The Descendants are rumouredtobe directly related to the Ancients. While thereis) DESCENDANTS OF DRACO no concrete proofof this, statistics show thatthe survivalratio in Descendant-Ancient ACTIVATIONS PER ACTION oa & ORION HEGEMONY ACTIVATIONS PER ACTION Ce ee contactis significantly higher for the Descendants than the other Seven.Hailing from the Draco system, the Descendants are a somewhatelusive species. While they are fully recognized memberof the Galactic Council, their Ambassadorsstill often cause discomfort amongthe otherspecies. SETUP AND STATS SPECIES RULES 3 Materials oe Explore Action: For each Activation, you mayflip s twoSectors from which to choose one(or none) 4 Science to place. Unplaced Sectors are discarded faceup in the corresponding Sector Discard Pile.2 Money (_) 3 Colony Ships > 1 VP per Ancient on the game board at the end of the game.Tech FUSION DRIVE Sector 228 You mayhaveShipsin Sectors containing oO Ancients, but are not allowed to battle the3a¢ Ancients; you may place Influence Discs in Sectors with Ancients; you are not allowedReputation Track QV to collect DiscoveryTiles from Sectors containing Ancients. Trade Value 3 a 10 After a long and difficult process, the Mechanemahaveonly recently been accepted as a full memberof the Council. Although they have been provensentient in every legal way defined by the other Seven, and the Auriga system has been assignedastheir sovereignty by the Council, there arestill occasional disputes on the matter. The birth of the species dates back to the early days of the Galactic Center, whentheartificial intelligences of various species were allowed to integrate. The Mechanemaare quite respectedfor their technological advancements; in fact, the basic Ship types now commonly used among the spacefaring species were originally designed by them. SETUP AND STATS SPECIES RULES 4 Materials © Cheaper Building costs (instead of): 3 science INTERCEPTAR: 2 9 (3) 3 Money Oo CRUISER: 4 E9 (5) 3 Colony Ships © DRENDNIUGHT: 7 EY (8) Tech POSITRON COMPUTER STARBASE: 2 €9 (3) Sector 230 ORBITAL: 3 ED (4) a¢ oid MONOLITH: 8 €9 (10) Reputation Track QOVIO Trade Value 3 A 10 The Hegemonyoriginally hails from the Orion system, buttheir fleets are known to have actively patrolled the general expansesofspacesince the early times. The tragedy that fell upon the Terran Federation Dreadnought"Juri Gagarin" and its accompanyingfleet maywell have been due to a grave misunderstandingin interspecies communication, plausible enoughin a mutualFirst Contact. The long warthat followed, and their seemingly overwhelming military power, gave the Hegemonytheir commonly used name. After the peace wasestablished andthe interspecies collaboration tookits first steps with the creation of the original Galactic Center, the Hegemony has now beenrecognized as a benevolent species, and their past as a ruthlessly efficient war machine has been reduced to a historical side note. SETUP AND STATS SPECIES RULES 4 Materials fa] FE Start with a Cruiser in your Starting 3 Science Sector instead of an Interceptor. 3 Money oO All Ship Blueprints have increased Initiative Bonuses.3 Colony Ships > Techs NEUTRON 30NBS, These Ship Blueprints have additional GAUSS SHIELD Energy Production: Sector 232 INTERCEPTOR .3¢g  5  CRUISER - Reputation Track  DREADNOUGHT - elelelele  Trade Value 4 a 10  Althoughthe speciesis still knownas the Terrans, its differentfactions have long since left their home system and nowcall new, distant systems their home. After the wormhole drive technology wasdiscovered, the six main factions set out to colonize the nearby systems, leaving the ruined and dying homeplanetbehind. The Terrans have proven to be a surprisingly adaptable and versatile species. After surviving the near-disastrous First Contact and the subsequentwarwith the species they named the Hegemony, they have maderather steady development and are now more or less unanimously regardedasa reliable memberof the Galactic Council. The main drawbackof the Terran society, and probably the reason preventing them from rising to true greatness, is their inherent need to squabble andform miniature factions amongstthemselves. TERRAN DIRECTORATE Sector 221 The Directorate governs the Procyon sector with a strong hand. Aseatin the InnerCircle is only given to the very best, carefully chosen (and rumoredly even genetically programmed) to continue the line of the Directors. While there may be power struggles behind the scenes, the Directorate is determinedto lead the ratherwell-off civilization toward a greatfuture. TERRAN UNION Sector 225 After the long diaspora, the Terran Unionsettled in the Eta Cassiopeiae system. Despite occasionalinternal struggles, the Union hasstoodtall during hard times, often through strong diplomatic efforts and by staying carefully neutral. This may soon change, however, as the home system will not be able to provide for the wholecivilization. TERRAN FEDERATION Sector 223 The Terran Federation consists of numerousstate systems with relatively similar ideals andhistories. The Altair system is considered to be the most important of them, and it houses the Federal Parliament. The state systems enjoyquite a lot of freedomin their government, butin time of need they work efficiently together to protect the Federation. TERRAN REPUBLIC Sector 227 After having set their homein the Sirius system and doing their part in the Hegemonywar, the people of the Terran Republic have built a democratically ruled society, enjoying a relatively stable andprosperouslife. ACTIVATIONS PER ACTION 1 12232 SETUP AND STATS Sector: 4 Materials €9 31¢ oO io 9 Science Reputation Tracktwo CIOUOO 3 Colony Ships) trade val mY Tech STARBASE rade Value? QQ) TERRAN CONGLOMERATE Sector 229 Unlike the otherTerran factions, the Conglomerate wasoriginally fully backed bycorporations eagerto invest in the deep space colonies. Thisis still reflected in the society all the way from the Board, the highest governmentalbody of the Conglomerate, to the most mundane details oflife in the Tau Ceti system. The Conglomerateis a financial powerhouse and oneof the key players in Galactic Center business. TERRAN ALLIANCE Sector 231 The Alliance was a majorforce in the Terran-Hegemony War, after the dissolving faction united against their common enemy. After a decisive victory in the Battle of Delta Pavonis (33.142) drove the Hegemonyfleet outof the sector, the Alliance made Delta Pavonis their home system. They have come a long waysince then, but the old treaties arestill in effect and the Alliance holds strong. ANCIENTS There are no reliable documents regarding the seclusion of the Ancients. Mosttheories are based onthe relics foundin the systemsbelieved to have been colonized by them. Someof the discoveries possess qualities previously unknownin the Galactic Library, but thereis no solid theory on who or whatthe Ancients were, nor where they disappearedto. Interestingly enough, folk tales of severaldifferent species allude to a similar, old, evil. Recent messages from various sectors report of multiple contacts with something described as "Ships unlike any knowndesign, with an unsettling feeling ofsomething hovering outside yourfield of vision" (Interceptor "Delirium of Disorder", Lambda Serpentis system, 43.393) GUARDIANS While mostof the galaxy still remains uncharted, many systems have already been visited by the Galactic Council ReconnaissanceFleet. The most promising ones have been reserved for Council purposes and declared neutral. Powerful autonomousentities, called the Guardians, have been deployed to maintain order and defend the systems from hostile visitors. However, if the defenses could be broken, the resource-rich planets wouldprovide great opportunities for their new master... GALACTIC CENTER ) Established at the endof the Terran— Hegemony War(30.027— 33.364), the awkwardly namedGalactic Center has since becomethe contact hub of knownspacefaring species. Evolved around the diplomatic Ships that negotiated the peace (Terran Interceptor "Shelterfrom the Storm" and Hegemony Dreadnought "Viewpoint Adjustment"), the conglomerateofShips andhabitats is now the homeforbillions Ea of entities, housing both the Galactic Council and the Library of the Galactic Center. The Council has representatives from the majorspecies knowncolloquially as the Seven. While the Galactic Center acknowledgesall the lesser spacefaring species as equals, only the Seven have a formalposition in the Council. The minor species do occasionally play their part in the Council powerstruggles. Evenin times offledgling peace, when alliances shatter and hasty diplomatic treaties are made, the Galactic Center is protected by the Galactic Center Defense System: unmanned automated heavy defenses programmedto target any military presence. AL Q: Where can | get more Resources? A: Place Influence Discs on Sectors, and use Colony Ships to move your Population Cubes to Population Squares. Research the Advanced Techs to move your Population Cubes to Advanced Population Squares. Build Orbitals to get more Population Squares. Collect Discovery Tiles. Q: What do I need Moneyfor? A: You need Moneyto Pay your Civilization Upkeep Cost. The more Actions you take and Sectors you Control, the more you have to Pay each Round. Q: That's all? A: You can also Trade Moneyfor other Resources, and vice versa. Q: | don't have enough Influence Discs to do everything | wantto. What now? A: You can usetheInfluence Action to return up to two Influence Discs from your Sectors to your Influence Track. You can also Research the ADVANCED rdsOTICS and QUANTUM Grid Techs, which give you moreInfluence Discs. Finally, you can deliberately use more Influence Discs than you can Pay for in the Upkeep Phase, and thus be required to return some of the Influence Discs from your Sectors to your Influence Track. Q:Thebest Techsareterribly expensive. How can | ever afford them? A: Having Techs of the same category increases the discount you get when buying more. If you buy the Techs in increasing price order, you get the maximum benefit of the discounts. Q: Whatis the benefit of being the Start Player? A: Besides receiving 2 Money you also get the first pick of Techs for Research or Zones for Exploring. Q: What happens if the extra Influence Discs acquired through the ADVANCED ROBOTICS and QUANTUM Grid Techs do not fit on my Influence Track? A: Stack the extra Influence Discs on top of the Influence Disc on the leftmost spaceof your Influence Track. You may use these extra Influence Discs normally. Q:Using the Influence Action, | can movean Influence Disc from oneSectorto a neighboring Sector through a Wormhole Connection. May | movethe Influence Disc from the Sector that provides the Wormhole Connection? A: No. As soon as you removethe Influence Disc from the Sector providing the Wormhole Connection you no longer meetthe Influence Action requirements. Q: During the Upkeep Phase, when may| removeInfluence Discs from mySectors? A: Only when you do not have enough Money(Producedin this Upkeep Phase, plus your Storage) to Pay your Civilization Upkeep Cost. Then you may removeInfluenceDiscsuntil your Civilization Upkeep Costis low enough. Notethat if you removean Influence Disc from a Sector, the Population Cubes in that Sector are immediately returned to your Population Tracks, which may also reduce your MoneyProduction. Q;: Is it ever possible to voluntarily remove Population Cubes from the game board without Abandoningthe Sector? A: No. It can be achieved with the Influence Action by first removingthe Influence Disc and the Population Cubes from the Sector and then returning the Influence Disc back to the Sector in a separate Influence Action. Q: My precious Ships keep getting blownto pieces. How can | win morebattles? A: You have an advantageif you get to shootfirst, cannot beHit, or can take some beating. Upgrade your Drives to increase your Initiative, and use Missiles to Attack before close-range combat. Upgrade Shields to render opponent's Computers useless. Upgrade Hull parts to withstand moreHits. Collect Discovery Tiles to get unique, powerful Ship Parts. Q: Aren't Interceptors too small to be of any use? A: Not really, but they do usually work best when specialized somehow.For example, try Upgrading them with a better Energy Source and they can pack quite a punch. Also, Interceptors are great for Pinning larger Ships, forcing opponents to spend more Actions to use them in importantbattles. Q: Are Shields of any use if my opponents don't have Computers? A: No. Then again,if they don't have Computers, they mostlikely won't Hit you anyway. Use that to your advantage. Q: If | have the GLUON COMPUTER Tech, can | take POSITRON COMPUTER Ship Parts? A: No. Each Ship Part (apart from the default ones,i.e. 10N CANNON, NUCLEAR DRIVE, NUCLEAR SOURCE, HULL and ELECTRON COMPUTER) requires its own Tech. Q:If all of my Shipstry to Retreat but are destroyed while doing so, do | get the Reputation Tile for participation in a battle? A: No. Your Ships incur the Retreat penalty as soon as they attemptto Retreat, regardless of whether they are able to finish Retreating. Q: If the Ancients are destroyed from a Descendants-Controlled Sector but the Descendants still Control the Sector, can they take the Discovery Tile? A: Yes, they take the Discovery Tile at the end of the Combat Phase. Q;: If the Discovery Tile | get from ANCIENT LA3S allows meto place somethingin a Sector (such as ANCIENT CRUISER or ANCIENT ORBITAL), where do! place it? A: You place it in your Starting Sector. If you do not Control your Starting Sector, you musttake thetile as 2VP. Q: Do | haveto use the Descendants' or Planta's Explore ability? If not, when may| choose whetherto useit or not? A: You don't have to draw twoSectors with the Descendants, or Explore twice with Planta. You can decide after seeing the first Sector. Q: Can I Move througha Sector containing an opponent's Ships using Cloaking Device without causing an Act of Aggression? A: Yes. Q: In whatorderdoplayers Influence Sectors at the end of the CombatPhase? A: For situations where the order of Influencing Sectors at the end of the CombatPhaseis important, each Sectoris resolved in descending Sector order. pretthaa, *(siioqap jo0g dpm JofZ abod aas) awes ay) Jo pua ay} ye pa|jo4juoD “sed GIYS I9ENOS INIDE-BUIZ YIM sqULdan|gt diys snoA apeasdn Aew no, :aounog yulod-013Z *(Buluuld uo sjinjap J0f ¢[ aBpd aas) sdiys inoA JO yoea Ulg 0} pasinbau ase sdius OM, :a2IAaq Bunjeo|> “sued GIYS TAINS NOLLUBSEV YIM sqULdanig diys 4noA apessdr Aew no, :pjarys uondsosqy: 194}O|]e0}5JeLOdueSIpues40y2aSJ!dATYOMpadueapy4099SSIY}SJIBUUODajI1[eOddeay‘}O4]U0DNOA4098SAubsasenbsuoljejndogAuojo>snoAyum‘sdiys:sisayquAseza|j|ulsaqn)uolejndogadejdAewno,Aueuoaji}Je140gdieayjaoejdAjayeipawiw|:jeyogdem, ‘ssauybam saldads*(sajl, Asanorsiq $,D1UD|q qaffo JOU saop SiYy} :a}0N "NOK uo Paya= uo sjipjap of 6 aBod aas) aj, Aianoosiq “suedNENNVOGIYSNELITES3 UO anjosad pue MeJp Ajayelpawiw] squudanygsnoAAew:uouue?Ou aney Senos NOXLNIN Awa -saquosqy UoANnaN:sqe] JuaDuy diysno,apes8dpUOWOSf “aye} NoA uoapessdy yea Sulunp “sedyum‘sed GIYS G1]14 BTRdINGD YMGIYSTINHLNSILNI4noAapessdpqAew:pjal4pjoyiuoDN:squldanigdiysSUOIJEAIY BpeUsdA jeuO!ppe Z Uled :40,e|NpOoYy OIId Yum squdanyg diys snoA apessdy Aew no, :|]NH JUaUAS nog*s]9B1e} JAA0 Ajaasy suouUeD JayeUWIUY*ae} NOA oly aAO| yea SuLINp Wwo4 asewep 1/ds 03 NOA smojy -sanNds JaQeWnUYI:“sedGISATISSINXM14UUMsquldan|g diys 4noApeAW NOA :a]ISSHAI XN|4 UONeADY SAO|EUOITPpe T Uled :s913S1307 panosd wy SHI9CTONHO3L uve‘CO Lly =r as ee “adj a[Buls e JO Sadunosay ¢ ules Ajajel paw! ‘|o1]U0D noA sioyas UO a pejmy yore 104 :Aay Dey *A[OYLUJOM AUUleUOD s10}AS BY} BUID9UUOD sa3pa ay} J! sio}9as Juaselpe aduan|ju| pue ‘0} BAO] ‘240)dxq Ae NOA AOJesBUaD BjOYUUOM “SUMJOUOI| PjINng AeW No, :y]OUCI*sdiys Auojop JNoA yum sasenbs uonejndog adualas padueApy ul saqn9 uonejndog aejd Aew no, :sqe7 pasueapy“oes aouanyuy JNOA uo Ajayelpawuuu! pase|d ‘osIg aouaN|yu| JEUOIUPpe BUO BAIaI9J NOA :sa}Oqoy pasueApy “SJEUCUO pling AeW NOA:]231G40 “SedGUSITISSINVNSVTdYIMsqUuLdanigaouaN|u| |EUOIIPpe OM} aAladaI NOA :ply NueNyH diysapeasdrnogesesnoAAew:ajissiA]‘SHedGIUS"SHedUIMMENESNONT9GIUSNONNVD43MsquLdanigBILIVHILNY43!squlidanigdiyssnoAapes8dqAewno,:4ayndwouon|ydiyssnoAapei8dpyAewno,:uouue)Jayewnuy“suedGIYS7AlUGNEAHQVLUMdiys 4noA apessdr Aew no, :ad4nos uoAyseL“sued GIYS 19UNOS NOAHIVUM sqULdanigsqulidan|gdiyssnoAapessdrAewno,:aatiguoAyseL“sdiys AuojoD“sdiysAnoyum sasenbs uoiejndog sjelaye\| Paduenpy ulAuojo94JNoAymsasenbsuone;jndogAauoy|pasueApysaqn) uonejndog asejd Aew no, :Sulul|~y pasueapyulsaqn9uonejndogasejdAewno,:Awouos3pasueApy*SHedGIYSATINSISVHeUM‘sedIUSBIMMENLDNOBLISGdYIMsqULUdanigsqulidanigdiys4noAapessdrAewnog:pjalysaseuddiyssnoAapes8drAewno,:4ayndwio0DuoJ}ISoOg“Sed“SHedGIYSGIUSNENNVSTINHVNSVIdGIAGEENI43!MsquudanigYIMdiusunoAapes8drqAewno,:uouuesewse|dsjulidan|gdiysnodapeusdaAewnog:|jNHpaaoidwy“sHed GIYS IAIUE NOISAY UM “sHed GIYS I9UMeS NOISNd YIM 1 squlidan|g diys snoA apesdn Aew no, :aAlig uolsn4 squlidanig dius 4noA apes3dr Aew no, :aounos uoisn4 “saseqieys pjing Aew no, :asequeys ‘(Iz aBod uo uoljnjndog bulys033V 2as) Ajjea1yewW0yne ‘uonpy “sledBT2INSpao.jsap aq Aew 403995 e ul SaqnD UO!ejndoga4}Sunjey SShVgpling dIYSYMUdYMC1]X9BACY:sJoqoioueN diysapessdrno,ssne5Je ‘uoIye|ndog Bulyoeyy Uday :squiog UOsNaNUO!PAIDYDUO sjuudanigAewNOX 4noA:pyalys$3190 10NH931 GNVN O SHI90T0NH931 C149 se S39010NH93L ARVLITIN rs PREPARATIONS = = a) Draw Tech Tiles for Tech Tray: City Outer (III) Sector stack size: Players 28 3M 4H SM 6M Players 2Q 23% 4h SR GA 14 16 18 8 14 16 18 a ACTION PHASE ¢ Beginning with the Start Player and proceeding clockwise, take one Action or Pass: (Hi?) EXPLORE Place a Sector next to a Sector where you have Controlor a Ship, may discard. Mayplace Influence Disc f) RESEARCH Take a Tech, Pay Science (m UPGRADE Discard and take Ship Parts (Bur) \. BUILD Build Ships or Structures in Sectors you Control, Pay Materials 2) (Wav)>-MOVE MoveShips; may Move sameordifferent Cs INFLUENCE MoveInfluence Discs and flip two Colony Ships faceup e At any time during your Action, you may use ColonyShips. 4+ players: form Diplomatic Relations ¢ Turn Summary Tile Reactions Overview side up when Passing. First to Pass: gain 2 Money ©) e After Passing, you mayonly do Reactions (weaker fm] ur, xy BUI or > MaV Actions without Tech bonuses) COMBAT PHASE DETERMINE BATTLES Identify all Sectors containing opposing Ships AREPUTATION -MAX5 @/OK RESOLVE BATTLES In descending Sector Number order per Sector: Ree ¢ Battle in reverse order of entry; non-player Ships and player Controlling Sector always Defender 2 © |® is always Hit, (4) +3 Gi: 6isaHit,| is always a Miss 1e, | aa K MUAY * Fire Missilesin Initiative order aS | FAA Ns ¢ Repeated Engagement Rounds 3 y FEA NOT ¢ After all battles in a Sector: Draw Reputation Tiles in order of entry 7 y mae N A ireiNa COMPLETING THE COMBAT PHASE —== ye fe : Bs: 10) kunci¢ Attack Population: Ships attack opponent Population Cubesin their Sector. — a ¢ Influence Sectors: players may take Control of Uncontrolled Sectors where they have Ships iG z eo RO * Discovery Tiles: undefended DiscoveryTiles are claimed ¢ Repair Damage: all Ship damageis reset by returning Damage Cubesto the supply UPKEEP PHASE ae © Mayuse ColonyShips in Sectors without opponent Ships ae is a * Collect Income,pay Civilization Upkeep Cost eo Siaa [ el men° Receive Production € Pee Manaareg/| 1-4 VP / SECTOR PIOUS LIRAseCLEANUP PHASE / 8Ve/ MONOLITH ¢ Return Influence Discs from Action Track to Influence Track sel ean ae AAG Draw new Tech Tiles from Tech Tile Bag: oe Oty Players 2/& 3A 4a 5A oA ry / LeetkeTiles56 7 8 9 //|1VP(A TILES) 2 V2 (5), 3? (6),5VP(1) —{ SPECIES 30HUSES }——— ¢ Flip all Colony Ships and SummaryTiles faceup, Advance the Round Marker. 